Chapter 4

Head Specialisation: Synthetic
Experiments


4.1      Research questions and objectives


In Chapter 3, we introduced a new methodology for computing semantic and structural
attention-head scores in GTs. In this chapter, we demonstrate the usefulness of
our methodology through a series of synthetic experiments. Firstly, we explore the
behaviour of global interventions – a core design principle – and show that it improves
faithfulness of head scores even when applied to sequence Transformers. We then
compute semantic and structural specialisation scores for a mixed semantic–structural
toy task, as well as a bipartite-matching algorithmic reasoning task. In particular, we
aim to answer RQ1: can controlled graph-input interventions yield causally validated
measures of semantic and tructural attention-head function in GTs? We therefore
prioritise the application of the causal methodology in Section 3.4 in validating the
role of joint sensitivity J and head selectivity Drel . The result is strongly affirmative:
we find that J is strongly correlated with the ablation impact of each head, showing
it to be a coherent measure of head importance; while Drel is causally validated to
be a reliable measure of a head’s preference for semantic or structural computation.
Moreover, we apply the methodology to find toy specialised heads, and characterise
layerwise behaviour in each task.
38                                          Head Specialisation: Synthetic Experiments


4.2      Validating scoring design principles
Objective. We implement a simple synthetic experiment to motivate the core design
principle of global interventions, i.e. applying interventions to the input of a model, in
contrast to the local key-permutations of prior work (Urrutia et al., 2026). In particular,
we showcase that using global interventions directly improves upon the methodology
introduced in Urrutia et al. (2026) even for sequence transformer applications. This
case study also supports the adoption of transport-based scores in place of pure
attention-based scores.

Teacher operator task. In this task, given an ordered input sequence X =
[x1 , . . . , xn ]⊤ ∈ Rn×d , the teacher “model" represents a simple lookup operation read
out at the final (query) position n,

                                        y = T (X).

where T (·) represents the teacher operation. We consider three lookups,

      Tprev (X) = xn−1 ,      Thalf (X) = x⌊n/2⌋ ,     Tloc (X) = arg max ⟨xn , xk ⟩,
                                                                     k<n


where for Tloc the query duplicates an earlier token, xn := xr with r ∼ U{1, . . . , n − 1},
so the lookup returns its position r. Thus prev and half return a token selected by
relative and absolute position, whereas loc returns a position selected by content. See
Figure 4.1(a) for an example of each teacher operation.

Student model. The student model is an 4-layer, single-head NoPE transformer (Ha-
viv et al., 2022), i.e. an LLM without explicit positional encoding. Each student fθ is
distilled to match the teacher at position n, ŷ = fθ (X)n , by minimising
                                            h          i
                                L(θ) = EX ℓ ŷ, T (X) ,

with ℓ the squared error for the token lookups (prev,half) and the cross-entropy over
                                                                           iid
positions {1, . . . , n − 1} for loc. Input sequences rows are drawn as xi ∼ N (0, Id ),
simplifying the data distribution and reducing overfitting risk. See Table 4.1 for a
summary of results.

Scoring methods. We consider three scoring methods: (i) local attention, an exact
reproduction of the method in (Urrutia et al., 2026); (ii) global attention, directly
4.2 Validating scoring design principles                                             39

Table 4.1 Training summary for the teacher-student tasks: mean ± std over 6 seeds.
Steps is the mean number of optimisation steps at early stopping.

         Task                                 Metric        Value        Steps
         Copy previous token                  MSE ↓ 0.238 ± 0.022 37 500
         Copy token at ⌊q/2⌋                  MSE ↓ 0.261 ± 0.059 40 000
         Report position of content match     Acc ↑ 0.999 ± 0.002 35 833


replacing local interventions with their global counterparts; and (iii) global transport,
where scores are computed on head output rather than attention alone. In line
with Urrutia et al. (2026), we compute the score on the final query. We report
the positional fraction, being the positional score divied by the semantic score. See
Figure 4.1(b).


Probing residual positional representation. For mechanistic validation, we
linearly probe each layer’s residual stream for how much position versus content it
encodes (Alain and Bengio, 2017). Pooling over all positions, we fit a linear probe to
predict the position index (accuracy a, random chance 1/n) and a linear regression to
reconstruct the input token (coefficient of determination, R2 ). We report the residual
positional-representation fraction,

                                    ρ = ã/(ã + R2 )                               (4.1)

where ã = max{0, (a − 1/n)/(1 − 1/n)}. A high ρ indicates that absolute position is
linearly recoverable from the stream, whereas a low ρ indicates a content-dominated
representation. See Figure 4.1(c).


Global interventions are faithful to residual stream dynamics. In Fig-
ure 4.1(c), we find that the positional-representation fraction increases with depth for
all three tasks. This is expected: NoPE models must encode positional information
into the residual stream (Haviv et al., 2022), and all three tasks are dependent on
position. Despite this, the local attention score (pink curve) produces positional scores
that decay with depth. In contrast, the global attention and transport-based scores
(blue and green curves) correctly measure a positional score that increases with depth.
This is because global interventions capture residual stream and network dynamics
more faithfully than local interventions by design.
40                                                                                Head Specialisation: Synthetic Experiments


     Tprev : one step back from the query                 Thalf : a fixed absolute position               Tloc : the earlier token matching the query

                                              query                                               query                                          query

        1      2       3      4        5          n          1       2        3          4    5    n         1        2          3   4     5       n




                                                                                                                      2
                                  target output                          target output                           target output




                                                      (a) Teacher operation examples.




                                  (b) Positional score / semantic score for each layer.




                                     (c) Residual positional-representation fraction ρ.

Fig. 4.1 Teacher–student operator distillation in LLMs: (a) One example of each
of the teacher tasks, visualised. (b) The per-layer positional specialisation fraction, by
scoring method. (c) The positional-representaiton fraction, computed by linear probe.


Transport-based scores improve upon attention-based scores. In these ex-
amples, the attention and transport-based scores largely agree. However, consider the
Tloc (content match) task, where a source must be selected by content yet return its
position. The global attention score only sees the selection, so it erroneously measures
the final layer of the student model as being semantic. The global transport score
contrastingly measures that the final-layer head retains a significant positional role
because it better captures the fact that significant positional information is transported
through the message itself, carried through the residual stream. This differences can
4.3 Validating semantic and structural scores                                     41


become significantly more pronounced when applied to graphs, especially considering
that many graph transformers inject structural encodings directly into the message
pathway, not attention alone.


4.3     Validating semantic and structural scores
Beyond principled improvements over prior work, the central methodological con-
tribution of this dissertation is the development of specialisation metrics for graph
transformers. In this section, we validate this methodology using a synthetic mixed
semantic–structural experiment. We show that the scores robustly recover inter-
pretable, causally meaningful head roles, clearly distinguish semantic from structural
computation, and remain informative despite substantial functional redundancy.


4.3.1    Semantic–structural mixture experiment
Mixed synthetic task. We construct a paired synthetic task to separate semantic
payload processing from structural-relation processing. Each example is an even cycle
graph C16 with a marked query node q and a marked source node s. The location of s
is uniformly randomly assigned. Each node receives a unique categorical key and an
independently and uniformly sampled value

                               vi ∼ Uniform{0, . . . , 7}

Examples are divided equally between two modes, marked by a binary task-mode
indicator. In the semantic mode, the target is to retrieve the value of the marked
source node,
                                    ysem = vs

Because s is sampled independently of graph position, RRWP carries no predictive
information about its value. In the structural mode, the target is the zero-indexed
shortest-path distance,
                                    ystr = d − 1

Node keys and values are independent distractors in this mode. Both tasks therefore
use the same graph family, source marker, query readout, and eight-class output head;
they differ only in whether the required signal is the source’s semantic value or its
structural relation to the query. Each task mode is visualised in Figure 4.2, and the
full task config is available in Appendix A.1.
42                                                                    Head Specialisation: Synthetic Experiments


     Semantic: retrieve the marked source value                           Structural: retrieve the query-source distance


                                   source                                                               source
                                   s
                                                ysem = vs                                              s           ystr = d − 1
                                                    2 {0, …, 7}                                                      2 {0, …, 7}
          retrieve source value

                                                                                             d hops


                     q                                                                   q
               graph distance does not predict vs                                 node keys and values do not predict d



Fig. 4.2 Mixed synthetic task. Left: The semantic mode retrieves the value of
the source whose key matches the query. Right: the structural mode retrieves the
shortest-path distance between the marked source and query nodes.


Graph Transformer. We use a 3-layer dense GRIT model (Ma et al., 2023). Graph
structure is represented by ten random-walk positional encoding channels,
                                                                  h                     i
                                             RRWPij = I, P, P 2 , . . . , P 9

where P is the transition matrix of C16 . Pair features comprise RRWP and a pair
edge-type embedding, while diagonal RRWP features are additionally supplied to
the node encoder. Predictions are read from the final representation of the marked
query node. The dense GT was trained to minimise cross-entropy loss across 3 seeds,
achieving perfect 1.000 ± 0.000 validation accuracy.


4.3.2        Recovering semantic and structural head roles
Intervention-defined head scores. Semantic and structural scores are computed
following the methodology introduced in Chapter 3. For the semantic intervention,
only the planted source’s value one-hot is replaced by a different on-manifold value.
The structural intervention follows from Section 3.2 exactly. For each intervention,
six counterfactual donors are sampled, and the aggregated scores are estimated using
G = 96 independently generated graphs per factor and seed. The corresponding
semantic and structural scores across three seeds are provided in Figure 4.3.


Specialisation and head roles. In Figure 4.3, we find strong semantic and structural
specialists, as well as a diverse range of heads that respond strongly to both semantic
and structural interventions. There is clear colinearity between the raw semantic and
4.3 Validating semantic and structural scores                                                                                                               43


structural scores in Figure 4.3(a), evidencing that many heads behave as generalists,
supporting predictions for both the semantic and structural modes of the task.


                                    (a) Raw task scores                                                  (b) Sensitivity and selectivity

                           10   1                                                                            structural    generalist      semantic




    Semantic score Ssem
                                                                                                  100




                                                                           Joint sensitivity J
                           100



                          10−1
                                                                                                 10−1


                          10−2

                                                                                                 10−2

                                        10−2     10−1     100        101                            −1.0          −0.5        0.0          0.5        1.0
                                         Structural score Sstr                                                    Head selectivity Drel
                            semantic selection      structural selection               L1               L2      L3        seed 0        seed 1    seed 2




Fig. 4.3 Head-level sensitivity and selectivity.Head-level task scores and speciali-
sation coordinates. (a) Raw semantic and structural scores for heads, coloured rings
mark the score-selected semantic and structural families. (b) Joint sensitivity J versus
relative selectivity Drel , where positive values indicate semantic preference and negative
values structural preference. Colour denotes layer and shape denotes seed.



Seed consistency. In Figure 4.3(a), we see consistent distributional specialisation
behaviour across seeds, with heads from different layers forming clear groups. However,
the precise head-to-head specialisation clearly varies across seeds, reflecting a qualitative
difference in the specialisation behaviour between models that otherwise perform equally
well on the task.


Specialised heads are interpretable. These observations are confirmed by Fig-
ure 4.4: the semantic specialist routes attention from the marked source to the query,
whereas the structural specialist broadcasts an anchor-centred signal across the graph,
with routing modulated by relative structural position. The high-J generalist shows
a superposition of both the semantic and structural specialist roles. Although the
first-layer head is semantic-leaning according to Drel , its small J and nearly diagonal
attention indicate a residual-like no-op, suggesting redundant capacity rather than
substantive semantic computation. This head matches the diagonal head identified in
Gemma-7B in Barbero et al. (2025). This no-op-like behaviour explains the oddities of
44                                                           Head Specialisation: Synthetic Experiments


layer 1 behaviour in Figure 4.5, and is overall a reflection of a high degree of redundancy
in the synthetic model.

     (a) Semantic specialist                         L2 H1       (b) Structural specialist                             L2 H2

                              1                                                          1


                                                                    3



                              8                                                          8

                                                                                  12

                      11
           8

                             16                                                         16
                                  1        8            16                                    1             8             16


     (c) High-J generalist                           L3 H4       (d) First-layer head                                  L1 H7

                              1                                                          1



      4                                                                           14

                              8                                                          8




                9                                                          9
                             16                                                         16
                                  1        8            16                                    1             8             16
                                       Source node                                                      Source node
                                                                                              Attention weight
          Query row        Source column
                                                                                0.0     0.2       0.4     0.6    0.8



Fig. 4.4 Specialised head examples.Representative attention patterns for a semantic
specialist, structural specialist, high-J generalist, and first-layer head. Each graph
colours source nodes by their attention into the query. Outlines mark the query row
and source column.



4.3.3          Causal validation of head roles
Scores predict causal roles. Figure 4.5 directly compares the scores with inde-
pendent causal measurements. J predicts overall ablation impact (ρ = 0.77; panel a),
while Drel predicts both task-specific ablation and rescue roles (panels b,c). These
relationships strengthen when low-J heads are excluded, owing to the exclusion of
no-op-like heads like the example in Figure 4.4.

Head roles are causal but redundant. Using the tests defined in Section 3.4,
Figure ?? tests the selected head families jointly. Semantic specialists most strongly
affect semantic logits, whereas structural specialists and high-J generalists most strongly
4.4 GraphBench Algorithmic Reasoning                                                                                                                               45


                            (a) Sensitivity vs impact                               (b) Selectivity vs ablation                            (c) Selectivity vs rescue
                                                                              1.0
                             All heads: ρ = 0.77                                     All heads: ρ = 0.87                                    All heads: ρ = 0.68
                                                                                     J ≥ 0.5: ρ = 0.93                                      J ≥ 0.5: ρ = 0.89
                   100




                                                         Ablation contrast
                                                                                                                                     0.1




Ablation impact                                                                                                   Rescue contrast
                                                                              0.5

                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                              0.0
                       −1
                  10
                                                                             −0.5                                                   −0.1


                                                                             −1.0                                                   −0.2
                            10−2       10−1      100                                −1          0           1                              −1          0           1
                                   Joint sensitivity J                                   Selectivity Drel                                       Selectivity Drel



Fig. 4.5 Head-level causal validation.Causal validation of the head metrics. (a)
Joint sensitivity J versus cross-mode ablation impact. (b) Selectivity Drel versus
semantic–structural ablation impact. (c) Selectivity versus semantic–structural rescue
contrast. Boxes report pooled Spearman correlations for all heads and for reliable
heads with J ≥ 0.5.

affect structural logits (panel a). Despite these substantial logit changes, accuracy
remains largely intact, indicating strong functional redundancy. Accordingly, joint
family ablation reveals no matched necessity effect (panel b). In contrast, clean-head
patching produces clear matched rescue: semantic heads recover semantic corruption,
while structural heads recover structural corruption (panel c). Thus, the families carry
task-specific causal information but are not individually necessary.


4.4                          GraphBench Algorithmic Reasoning
Bipartite matching. We next validate the methodology on GraphBench algorthmic
reasoning (Stoll et al., 2025). We analyse four independently trained GRIT models
on held-out n = 16 graphs from the hard bipartite-matching task, using a reduced
train/val/test split of 40k/4k/4k graphs. Bipartite matching selects the highest-weight
set of edges connecting two disjoint node groups such that no node is selected more
than once. The substantive content feature is the scalar weight assigned to each edge,
which are perturbed by the semantic donor-swap interventions. Structural interventions
perturb the RRWP pair and node features and degree encoding as usual for a GRIT
model.

Scores identify important and selective heads. Figure 4.8(a–b) shows broadly
balanced semantic and structural scores, with high-J generalists alongside some early
layer selective heads. This distribution is consistent across seeds, although individual
46                                                                                                 Head Specialisation: Synthetic Experiments


                                       (a)                          Semantic task                       (b)                               Structural task




  Functional logit impact
                             12.5

                             10.0

                                       7.5

                                       5.0

                                       2.5

                                       0.0

                                       (c)                                                              (d)




                  Accuracy drop (pp)
                                        20

                                        15

                                        10

                                                 5

                                                 0
                                                      0              1                 2           3                       0               1                 2          3
                                                                                            Jointly ablated heads
                                                                               Semantic    Structural    Generalist                     Inert




Fig. 4.6 Joint ablation of head families.Joint ablation of semantic specialists,
structural specialists, high-J generalists, and low-J heads. Curves show the across-seed
mean functional impact (top) and accuracy drop (bottom) as progressively more heads
are ablated on the semantic (left) and structural (right) tasks; bands show the observed
seed range.

                                                          (a) Necessity                                                          (b) Rescue



                                                 Semantic       +0.003        +0.052                                       Semantic      +0.154            +0.066




                                Ablated family                                                            Patched family
                                                 Structural     +0.000        +0.010                                       Structural    +0.006            +0.128



                                                                Semantic      Structural                                                 Semantic         Structural
                                                                   Evaluation task                                                               Corruption


                                                     -0.060               0.000            0.060                               -0.16                  0.00             0.16
                                                                     Δ Cross-Entropy                                                            Mediated fraction


Fig. 4.7 Role-specific necessity and rescue interventions. (a) Change in cross-
entropy after ablating each head family on each evaluation task. (b) Fraction of the
corruption effect mediated by clean-to-corrupt patching of each family. Rows denote
the intervened family and columns the evaluation task or corruption.
4.4 GraphBench Algorithmic Reasoning                                                 47


head identities vary. Crucially, J strongly predicts the output impact of single-head
ablation (ρ̄ = 0.76, 95% CI [0.74, 0.78]; panel c). This further validates the causal
importance of J.

Head scores predict causal behaviour. Figure 4.8(d) shows that head scores
predict how changing a head affects the model’s output. Restoring a head’s original
output after an intervention reverses the effect most strongly when the head type
and intervention match: semantic-scoring heads preferentially reverse edge-weight
changes, whereas structural-scoring heads preferentially reverse structural-encoding
changes. The reverse experiment gives the same result: inserting an intervened head
output into the original graph preferentially reproduces the corresponding intervention
effect. Notably, the structural heads are found to still respond strongly to the semantic
interventions. While many heads are semantic specialists, the structural-leaning heads
still have a substantive semantic score, as shown in Figure 4.8(b–d). Hence, response
of these heads to the semantic intervention is expected and further validates Drel . We
also find that removing any single head eliminates only a small proportion of the
intervention effect, indicating substantial redundancy as was found in Section 4.3.
Overall, the scores identify which type of information a head preferentially processes,
even when that head is not individually essential.
48                                                                                                                                                                                Head Specialisation: Synthetic Experiments




                  Semantic and structural head scores                                                                                                  Joint sensitivity and relative selectivity                                                                                              Joint sensitivity and head-ablation impact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Output change after head ablation
                  6                                                                                          5                                                                                                   5                                                                                                  Mean seed = 0.76 [0.74, 0.78]                   5
                                                                                                                                                       2.5                                                                                                                                                 14
                  5
                                                                                                             4                                                                                                   4                                                                                         12                                                       4



                                                                                                                                Joint sensitivity, J
                                                                                                                                                       2.0


 Semantic score
                  4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                             3                                                                                                   3                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                             Layer                                                                                                Layer                                                                                                                                              Layer
                                                                                                                                                       1.5                                                                                                                                                  8
                  3
                                                                                                             2                                                                                                   2                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                       1.0                                                                                                                                                  6
                  2
                                                                                                             1                                                                                                   1                                                                                          4                                                       1
                  1                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                             0                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                                                  0
                  0                                                                                                                                    0.0                                                                                                                                                  0
                      0                                                 2            4            6                                                          1.0        0.5      0.0      0.5         1.0                                                                                                       0             1             2
                                                                      Structural score                                           Head selectivity, Drel (structural                             0     semantic)                                                                                                            Joint sensitivity, J
                      Seed 0                                                Seed 1           Seed 2       Seed 3                                             Seed 0           Seed 1        Seed 2             Seed 3                                                                                           Seed 0            Seed 1          Seed 2          Seed 3


 (a) Specialisation scores.                                                                                                                                        (b) J vs Drel .                                                                                     (c) Ablation impact vs J.

                                                                        Clean head state in an intervened graph                                                       Intervened head state in a clean graph                                                                                                                   Head necessity




                      Output effect beyond mismatch control                                                                                                                                                                   Intervention effect removed (fraction)
                                                              0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.125
                                                                                                                                                         0.15
                                                              0.20                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.100
                                                              0.15                                                                                       0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.075
                                                              0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.050
                                                                                                                                                         0.05
                                                              0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.025
                                                                                                                                                         0.00                                                                                                          0.000
                                                              0.00
                                                                     Semantic intervention            Structural intervention                                   Semantic intervention               Structural intervention                                                                                Semantic intervention                Structural intervention

                                                                                                                                                               Mean and 95% bootstrap CI across four seeds
                                                                                                                     Semantic-scoring heads                                   Structural-scoring heads           J-matched null heads


                                                                                             (d) Causal analysis of semantic and structural roles.

Fig. 4.8 Bipartite matching. (a) Semantic and structural head scores. (b) Joint
sensitivity J and relative selectivity Drel . (c) J predicts the output impact of single-head
ablation. (d) Left: patching the clean head state into an intervened graph measures
causal restoration. Middle: patching the intervened head state into a clean graph
measures causal injection. Right: the fraction of each intervention effect removed with
the head’s donor-induced response, compared with J-matched null heads. Error bars
show 95% confidence intervals across four trained seeds.
