
=== PAGE 1 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 1
DARTS-GT: Differentiable Architecture Search for
Graph Transformers with Quantifiable
Instance-Specific Interpretability Analysis
Shruti Sarika Chakraborty Peter Minary
Abstract—Graph Transformers (GTs) have emerged as pow- Current state-of-the-art GTs incorporate graph structure
erful architectures for graph-structured data, yet remain con- through GNN-Transformer combinations [2], [6], specialized
strained by rigid designs and lack quantifiable interpretability positional encodings [7], and attention augmentation with
methods. Current state-of-the-art GTs commit to fixed GNN
structural biases [8]. However, these architectures commit to
types across all layers, missing potential benefits of depth-
a fixed GNN type throughout all layers or a predetermined
specific component selection, while their increasingly complex
architectures become opaque black boxes where performance encoding scheme. This rigidity prompts an investigation into
gains cannot be distinguished between meaningful structural whether GTs benefit from depth-specific component selection.
patterns and spurious correlations. We redesign the GT attention Depth-specific, task-adaptive GNN selection is motivated by
mechanism through asymmetry, decoupling structural encoding
recent neural-architecture-search (NAS) successes in GNNs.
from feature representation. Queries derive directly from node
Methods like GraphNAS [9], SANE [10], and PAS [11] show
features, while keys and values come from graph neural network
(GNN) transformations, separating how the model learns features that heterogeneous architectures employing different GNN
from how it encodes graph structure. Within this asymmetric operations across depths outperform homogeneous models.
framework, we use Differentiable ARchiTecture Search (DARTS) These works reveal that optimal architectures develop dataset-
to select optimal GNN operators at each layer, enabling depth-
adaptive depth-wise specialization, learning complementary
wise heterogeneity inside the transformer attention itself, hence
patterns at different scales. In GTs, where multiple attention
the name DARTS-GT. To understand these discovered architec-
tures, we develop the first quantitative interpretability framework heads already capture diverse node-node interactions, depth-
for GTs through causal ablation that identifies which heads and wise architectural diversity becomes even more compelling,
nodes actually drive predictions. Our metrics: Head-deviation, yet remains unexplored.
Specialization, and Focus, reveal the specific components re-
Relaxing architectural constraints introduces a broader chal-
sponsible for each prediction while enabling broader model
lenge. As Graph Transformer variants become more flexible,
comparison. Experiments across eight benchmarks demonstrate
that DARTS-GT achieves state-of-the-art performance on four their internal decision processes become increasingly opaque.
datasets while remaining competitive on others, with discovered Without interpretability methods, it is difficult to determine
architectures revealing dataset-specific patterns ranging from whether reported gains reflect meaningful structural patterns
highly specialized to balanced GNN distributions. Our inter-
or spurious correlations. This, for example, forms a crucial
pretability analysis reveals that visual attention salience and
distinction in scientific domains such as drug discovery, where
causal importance do not necessarily correlate, indicating that
widely used visualization approaches may miss the components predictions must be justifiable. However, this issue is not
that actually matter for predictions. Crucially, the heterogeneous specific to a particular GT design: for instance, in GraphGPS
architectures found by DARTS-GT consistently produced more (also referred to as GPS) [6], which has a hybrid-GT architec-
interpretable models than baseline GTs, establishing that Graph
ture by combining message-passing-neural-networks (MPNN)
Transformers do not need to choose between performance and
in parallel with transformer attention, it is unclear whether
interpretability.
improvements arise from the auxiliary MPNN or the Trans-
Index Terms—Graph Transformers, Neural Architecture
former path. Similarly, in Graph-Trans [12] and SAT [2], the
Search, Interpretability, Causal Ablation, Graph Neural Net-
contribution of the GNN pre-encoding or k-subtree extraction,
works
respectively, is similarly entangled. In short, regardless of
the GT approach, interpretability is essential to clarify which
I. INTRODUCTION components and structures truly drive model performance.
Recent NAS efforts for GTs include EGTAS [13], Au-
For graph-structured data, Graph Transformers (GTs) have
toGT [14], UNIFIEDGT [15] and UGAS [16]. EGTAS
become a dominant architectural choice, combining attention
uses evolutionary search to explore topologies and graph-
mechanisms with graph-awareness [1], [2]. Their success
aware strategies by searching through established architec-
spans protein structure-to-function prediction [3], drug dis-
tural paradigms from state-of-the-art designs. This essentially
covery [4], and materials design [5], where understanding
navigates between existing construction patterns, selecting in
complex structural patterns is crucial.
this process a single GNN block type, applied uniformly
across depth. AutoGT employs evolutionary strategies over
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford
established GT templates and encodings, without depth-wise
OX1 3QG, UK. Emails: shruti.chakraborty@cs.ox.ac.uk,
peter.minary@cs.ox.ac.uk. GNN selection. UNIFIEDGT exposes modular search over
5202
tcO
03
]GL.sc[
2v63341.0152:viXra

=== PAGE 2 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 2
components and selects an overall configuration rather than mechanism rather than through external augmentation, thereby
layer-wise GNN selection within attention blocks. UGAS uses rewiring how GTs capture graph structure. The search proce-
Differentiable ARchiTecture Search (DARTS) or Genetic Al- dure is powered by DARTS [27], which leverages gradient-
gorithms (GA) to search over subsets of MPNN modules (e.g., based optimization of the continuously relaxed architecture
GCN [17], GAT [18]) and GT modules (Transformer [19], space, avoiding the expense of training discrete candidates
Performer [20]) deployed in parallel within each layer. Each from scratch. DARTS has been extensively validated in prior
layer may contain only MPNNs, only GTs, or any mixture, graph NAS studies (e.g., SANE [10], GASSO [28], PAS [11],
with GTs treated as optional candidates rather than architec- UGAS), underscoring its computational efficiency and robust-
tural foundations. ness in navigating combinatorial design spaces.
The selection of depth-specific GNN presents a formidable Second, we introduce a Fidelity like [29], [30], instance-
optimization problem: with n GNN variants across L layers, level, ablation-grounded score: Head-deviation, quantifying
the search space contains nL configurations. Thus, system- prediction changes when specific heads are masked. From per-
atic exploration of this search space is infeasible in most head effects on each instance, we compute two complementary
practical applications. An effective search must intelligently metrics: Specialization captures head distinguishability as dis-
adapt to datasets and tasks, determining which GNN types to persion of head impacts (high = few heads carry causal load;
deploy and their optimal layer positions (depth). This requires low = heads act interchangeably); Focus captures consensus
automated search techniques, specifically NAS, capable of over graph regions by measuring top-head agreement on top-k
navigating this vast configuration space. nodes (high = heads converge on same salient substructures
These discovered architectures must also be interpretable for or nodes). Aggregating per-instance values by dataset median
trustworthiness and scientific validity. Unlike well-developed yields robust model-level summaries. Together, these form
GNN explainability methods [21] that identify prediction- our interpretability framework that we propose to analyse
critical subgraphs, GT interpretation, widely regarded as a our model along with existing models for comparison. Head-
blackbox [22], remains dominated by attention visualiza- deviation provides head and graph-region attributions per
tion [23] lacking quantitative metrics and the ability to differ- input, while median Specialization and median Focus enable
entiate visually prominent but functionally irrelevant patterns dataset-level GT comparison indicating which model is easier
from subtle yet critical ones. More recently, noteworthy efforts to interpret at matched accuracy.
in GT interpretability have focused on analyzing attention This interpretation is particularly valuable in applica-
graphs (i.e. aggregating head/layer attention into an atten- tions like drug toxicity prediction. When identifying toxic
tion graph) [24]. However, none of the prior methods test molecules, practitioners must verify the focus on actual tox-
faithfulness (whether heads/nodes causally affect predictions) icophores versus spurious correlations critical for regulatory
nor enable cross-model comparison via standardized scores. approval and scientific validity. Also, without methods to
Task-specific self-explanations exist but do not generalize to quantify the difficulty of interpretation, meaningful archi-
arbitrary GTs or provide head attributions [25]. We seek a GT- tecture comparison remains impossible. Our framework pro-
agnostic instance-level interpretability framework grounded vides quantifiable metrics representing the first quantitative
in perturbation/ablation that delivers model-level scores for framework for both globally evaluating and comparing GT
comparing GT interpretability. interpretability while providing instance-specific analysis that
Hence, our investigation addresses two complementary re- traces predictions from architectural components to graph
search questions: Q1: Can Graph Transformers achieve im- regions.
proved performance and adaptability by dynamically selecting Our specific contributions:
GNN types per layer (depthwise) and creating dataset-specific 1) The first DARTS-based architecture search for depth-
architectures ranging from uniform to heterogeneous? Q2: wise GNN selection within GT layers, exploring het-
How can we quantitatively assess the interpretability of a erogeneity through layer-specific GNN operators within
GT and identify which regions of the graph and architectural attention blocks. Our approach maintains computational
components drive specific predictions? efficiency to find depth-wise optimal GNN selections
These questions are inter-linked: Q1 explores performance among the possible configurations (n GNN variants,
potential, while Q2 ensures interpretability and trustworthi- L layers). This enables automated discovery of task
ness, essential for high-stakes domains. optimal architectures.
To address these challenges, we introduce a comprehensive 2) Strong empirical performance achieving competitive or
framework with two synergistic components: SOTA results on multiple benchmarks. Our architec-
First, we employ DARTS to select GNN operators within ture consistently outperforms standard GTs [19] across
the attention blocks at each layer. In doing so, we reimagine dense and sparse attention mechanisms, while match-
the asymmetric attention mechanism initially proposed by ing or exceeding established baselines: Recent GNNs
GMTPool [26], but in a more computationally efficient form: (e.g. GCN [17], GIN [31], GatedGCN [32]), recent
queries are derived directly from node features, while keys GT architectures (e.g. GPS [6], Graphormer [8]), and
and values are obtained through GNN transformations of those NAS-based approaches (e.g. EGTAS [13], AutoGT [14],
features. This design explicitly separates structural encoding UGAS [16]).
from feature representation and enables depth-wise hetero- 3) To our knowledge, we also introduce the first GT-
geneity across layers, embedding it directly inside the attention agnostic interpretability framework that is both instance-

=== PAGE 3 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 3
level and quantitative. We compute an ablation-grounded suffers from computational inefficiency: each attention head
Head-deviation metric per input, then derive Specializa- requires independent GNN operations for its keys and values,
tion (head distinguishability) and Focus (consensus of scaling complexity linearly with head count. Moreover, their
top-head node sets). Dataset-level medians provide ro- framework remains confined to graph-level pooling rather than
bust model-level summaries, enabling both local evalua- general transformation layers. We borrow the idea of asymmet-
tion (which heads/nodes mattered) and global evaluation ric query–key/value sources, but reimagine it within full GT
(which model is easier to interpret). Our analyses reveal layers with a computationally efficient approach: queries come
that visually broad attention can emerge as functionally directly from node features (instead of node embeddings in
irrelevant, while sparse patterns can be decisively pre- GMT that undergo another layer of GNN), while keys/values
dictive: underscoring the limits of visualization-based are produced by layer-specific GNN operators, shared across
approaches. heads for efficiency and generalization beyond graph-level
4) We apply the interpretability framework across three ar- pooling.
chitectures (DARTS-GT, GPS [6] and standard (Vanilla) NAS for Graphs and Graph Transformers: Early
GT [19]) and show that the DARTS-GT derived model Graph neural-architecture-search (GNAS) studies such as
is more consistent overall in terms of overall consensus GASSO [28], SANE [10], GraphNAS [9] and PAS [11] are
(Focus) and head-distinguishability (Specialization). searched over message-passing cells on pure GNN based
In summary, we (i) propose a differentiable NAS backbone supernets. However, for GTs, AutoGT [14] de-
framework that builds depth-wise heterogeneous Graph fines a unified GT formulation and searches Transformer
Transformers through direct redesigning of the attention hyperparameters plus structural/positional encodings, but the
mechanism rather than auxiliary GNN augmentation and resulting architecture is globally tied rather than layer-wise
(ii) develop quantitative interpretability metrics at head- heterogeneous. EGTAS [13] expands the GT search space with
and node-level per instance. Our code is available at: macro- (topology) and micro- (graph-aware strategies) design
https://github.com/shrutiOx/DARTS GT. and uses evolutionary search to assemble end-to-end GTs.
UGAS [16] proposes a Unified Graph Neural Architecture
II. RELATED WORK Search that explores which subsets of MPNN modules and
We discuss three interconnected themes related to this work GT modules to activate in parallel per layer, with GTs treated
in separate paragraphs. as optional candidates rather than foundational components.
Graph Transformer : A broad line of recent work Complementary frameworks such as UNIFIEDGT [15] mod-
combines global self-attention with graph inductive bias ularize GT components (sampling, structural priors, attention,
(GNNs) [12]. GraphGPS [6] interleaves local message passing local/global mixing, FFNs) to instantiate many GT variants.
with global attention and aggregates rich positional/structural Our work is orthogonal. We keep the GT spine and search
encodings, effectively in a parallel MPNN and transformer for the local operator (GNN) per layer with DARTS, yielding
attention design, setting a strong template for hybrid GTs. adaptive uniform/heterogeneous architectures while preserving
SAN [7] injects spectral positional information and runs a global attention. This enables direct analysis of how structural
fully connected Transformer, showing that learned spectral PEs encoding choices impact performance within a consistent
can offset oversquashing while preserving structure. SAT [2] computational framework.
goes further and makes attention itself structure-aware by Interpretability of (Graph) Transformers Existing trans-
extracting k-subtree/k-subgraph features with a base GNN be- former studies investigate head importance for pruning [33],
fore computing attention, consistently improving performance i.e., measuring global accuracy drops to compress models,
over baseline GTs. Graphormer [8] augments attention with or through head ablation to assess model performance under
centrality, shortest-path and edge encodings, and demonstrated masking [34], [35]. We instead quantify instance-specific
state-of-the-art molecular property prediction at scale. Variants importance for interpretability, identifying which heads and
in other modalities (e.g. Mesh Graphormer [1]) reinforce nodes drive individual predictions rather than finding glob-
the pattern of mixing graph convolution with attention to ally redundant components. This connects to the broader
capture local+global interactions. Graph-Trans [12] integrates line of causal interventions known as activation patching,
a preliminary stack of GNN layers before Transformer blocks, where internal components are ablated or replaced, and the
using the GNN to encode local structural patterns that the output change is measured [36] [37]. Zero-ablation, as we
subsequent attention layers can then exploit. Our work sits in employ, is a popular variant [36] amongst other causal-tracing
this stream but differs in how the local component is chosen: techniques. Our contribution adapts this causal, instance-level
instead of a fixed GNN extractor or a single hybrid template, paradigm to Graph Transformers, introducing head-specific
we dynamically select the GNN type per Transformer layer to ablations with novel metrics. Although GNN explainability has
yield dataset-specific, potentially heterogeneous stacks. matured through tools like GNNExplainer [21] that identify
A related pooling-centric line is Graph Multiset Transformer prediction-critical subgraphs, graph transformers lack equiva-
(GMT) [26], which builds graph-level representations with lent methodologies. Most GT interpretability either visualizes
attention-based pooling. GMT computes K/V via GNNs to attention [23] or aggregates it across layers. Methods based
explicitly encode structure while forming queries from node on attention flow track information paths through attention,
embeddings, improving over linear projections used in stan- but remain correlational [24]. Lastly, some protein structure to
dard multi-head-attention (MHA). Yet GMT’s implementation function prediction papers [3] use GradCAM in GT attention

=== PAGE 4 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 4
to identify ’important’ residues, but this only shows where 2) Multi-Head Concatenation: Each head outputs Y
m
∈
gradients flow, not whether those regions actually help correct R n × dm, with d m = d/M . We concatenate the head outputs
prediction i.e. if it truly contributes to accuracy. Our study along the feature dimension and project back to the model
complements this space with causal ablations at two levels: (i) dimension d:
Specialization (indicates whether heads are easily distinguish- Y = [Y Y Y ] W ,
1 2 M out
able by their causal impact) and (ii) Focus (are top-performing ∥ ∥ · · · ∥ (6)
head agree on node consensus). The proposed metrics align where W out ∈ R (Mdm) × d = R d × d.
with established interpretability principles for GNNs (e.g. 3) Feed-Forward Layers and Skip Connections: Following
sparsity, consistency, fidelity) [29] while tying interpretations the attention module, each block applies a two-layer position-
directly to measured performance changes under controlled wise feed-forward network with residual connections and
deletions. normalization applied after each sublayer:
Zˆ (ℓ) = Norm Z(ℓ) + Y(ℓ) , (7)
III. METHODS
A. Preliminaries Z˜ (ℓ) = σ Zˆ (ℓ) (cid:0)W 1 (ℓ) + b( 1 ℓ) (cid:1) W 2 (ℓ) + b( 2 ℓ), (8)
Z(ℓ+1) = N(cid:0)orm Zˆ (ℓ) + Z˜ (ℓ) (cid:1), (9)
We consider a graph G = (V, E) with node features F
∈
R n × d, where n = V and d is the feature dimension. A Graph where σ is the nonlinear(cid:0)ity (we use R(cid:1) ELU in our implemen-
Transformer consis | ts | of L layers, each containing multi-head tation), W 1 (ℓ) ∈ R d × rd, W 2 (ℓ) ∈ R rd × d, and b( 1 ℓ), b( 2 ℓ) are
attention followed by feed-forward modules. Let Z(ℓ) R n × d biases. We use r=2 in our implementation, and Norm denotes
∈
denote the node embeddings in layer ℓ. either LayerNorm or BatchNorm depending on configuration.
For brevity, we omit the layer index ℓ when the context is
clear. With M attention heads where m [1, 2, ..., M ], the
∈ B. DARTS-GT
attention components are computed as:
Problem. Layer-wise Operation Selection
Q = ZW , K = ZW , V = ZW (1) For a Graph Transformer with L layers and a set of candidate
m Q,m m K,m m V,m
operations = o , o , ..., o , where = n, the goal is to
1 2 n
where Q m , K m , V m R n × dm, W Q,m , W K,m , W V,m find the op O timal { sequence of } layer-wis | e O o | perations from the
∈ ∈
R d × dm and d m = d/M . We assume that d m Z>0 (i.e. d is search space of nL possible configurations leading to the
∈
divisible by M ). S
optimal architecture , an ordered sequence of layer-wise
∗
A
operations (one per layer):
1) Attention Mechanisms: In our study, we explore dense
and sparse attention. ∗ = o(1) ∗ , o(2) ∗ , ..., o(L) ∗ (10)
A { }
a) Full Attention:: Each node attends to all others:
Here o(ℓ) denotes the selected operation at layer ℓ.
∗
∈ O
Q K Formally, this architecture search is formulated as:
S = softmax m ⊤m , Y = S V (2)
m m m m
√d
(cid:18) m (cid:19) ∗ = arg min val (w ∗ ( ), ) (11)
A L A A
where S m R n × n, Y m R n × dm and softmax is ap- A∈S
∈ ∈ subject to:
plied row-wise for full attention (per-query normalization).
This leads to a complexity of (n2d m ) per head and w ∗ ( A ) = arg m w in L train (w, A ) (12)
O
(n2 d ) = (n2d) across M heads.
O m m O where denotes the search space of all nL architectures, w
b) Sparse Attention: In this formulation, nodes attend S
(cid:80) represents the network weights, and w ∗ ( ) are the optimal
only to graph neighbors. This leads to a complexity of A
weights for architecture . The following sections describe the
( E d ) per head and ( E d ) = ( E d) across A
O | | m O | | m m O | | approach we chose to solve the architecture search problem
M heads. For the edge set E = (i, j) where i and j denote
{(cid:80) } and the set of candidate operations, and hence, the search
source and target nodes. For each edge (i, j), we compute the
space.
attention coefficient between source node i and target node j.
1) Bilevel Optimization via DARTS: Enumerating all pos-
Thus for edge (i, j) E:
∈ sible configurations in is generally infeasible, so we adopt
S
[K ] , [Q ] the Differential Architecture Search (DARTS) [27] framework
m i m j
β = ⟨ ⟩ (3)
m,ij √d to solve the optimization problem formulated by equations 11
m
and 12. DARTS reformulates discrete selection as a contin-
exp(β ) uous, differentiable optimization. Specifically, it introduces
m,ij
s = (4)
m,ij exp(β ) a softmax relaxation over candidate operations, casting the
i′:(i′,j)
∈
E m,i′j
architecture search as the following bilevel optimisation prob-
(cid:80) lem [38]:
[Y ] = s [V ] (5)
m j m,ij m i
i:(i(cid:88),j)
∈
E
min (w (α), α, )
where [Y m ] j , [Q m ] j , [K m ] i , and [V m ] i denote the j-th and α L val ∗ D DARTSval (13)
i-th rows of the respective matrices. s.t. w ∗ (α) = arg min train (w, α, DARTStrain )
w L D

=== PAGE 5 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 5
where w represents the network weights and α = α(ℓ)
o
{ |
o , ℓ 1, ..., L are continuous architecture parameters,
wi
∈
th
O
α o
(ℓ)∈ {
R repres
}
e
}
nting the architecture weight (importance
∈
factor) for the operation o at layer ℓ. Rather than solving
the full bilevel optimization, we adopt the efficient first-order
approximation of DARTS [27], which avoids Hessian–vector
products. In practice, we first randomly shuffle the entire
training dataset and partition it into darts-training split,
train
D
for updating weights w and darts-validation split,
DARTStrain
D
for updating architecture parameters α, alternating
DARTSval
D
the single gradient steps [27]. More details about this approach
can be found in [27]. Although the second-order DARTS
update is more accurate, it requires expensive Hessian–vector
products and offers limited practical gains in our setting.
2) Search Space Definition: In our work, we use the fol-
lowing set of candidate operations: = GINE [39], GATv2
O {
[40], GatedGCN [32] . Hence, = n = 3 leads to a search
} |O|
space of 3L architectures.
The following operators were selected because they rep-
resent very distinct message-passing paradigms that capture
complementary aspects of graph structure.
GINE: Extends GIN [31] with edge features via
•
permutation-invariant MLP aggregation,
GATv2: Employs dynamic, edge-aware attention-based
•
aggregation,
GatedGCN: Uses edge-gated message propagation with
•
soft edge selection.
This diversity ensures that our search space covers com-
plementary inductive biases while remaining computationally
efficient.
Fig. 1: DARTS-GT with interpretability framework. Node 3) Asymmetric Attention Design: Departing from the stan-
features produce Query via a global MLP/identity, while dard transformer formalism outlined in the Preliminaries sec-
Key, V alue come from a single GNN applied once per layer tion, the novelty of our approach includes an asymmetric
and shared across all heads; heads differ only in their per- design: queries are derived directly from node features, while
head linear projections, reducing cost versus per-head GNNs. keys and values are produced by layer-specific GNN operators.
The violet disc denotes the DARTS mixed operation over This is initially motivated by the GMH design of GMT [26],
candidate GNNs (GINE, GATv2, GatedGCN) during search; where they demonstrated that decoupling the computational
after search, exactly one GNN is fixed per layer (e.g. final sources for the attention components enhances graph-aware
searched network in the supplementary). Grey discs indicate representations. In GMT, node features are first transformed by
the per-head linear transformations (matrix multiplications a GNN to obtain H, with queries taken directly as Q = H and
with learned weights). The yellow is the score computation each head computing its own keys and values via an additional
×
QueryKey ⊤ (followed by Softmax), and the green is the GNN applied to H. This asymmetry separates structural en-
×
matrix product of the Softmax expression with V alue yielding coding from feature representation, but at the cost of computa-
the attention output. An edge pathway (edge embedding tional inefficiency, since every key and value inside every head
→
edge processing) supplies an optional gated residual added requires an independent GNN. In contrast, our design takes
before Norm–FFN–Norm. Interpretability (bottom): on each node features directly into Q, and shares the GNN operator
test graph, mask one head at a time and recompute loss across heads within a layer, producing an efficient formulation
to obtain Head Deviation; from these, compute per-instance that still preserves the benefits of feature–structure decoupling.
Specialization (spread across heads) and Focus (agreement of More broadly, rather than augmenting Graph Transformers
top-k heads on top-r% nodes), then report dataset medians. externally with auxiliary MPNNs, a widely practiced approach
[6], [16], we demonstrate that graph awareness can emerge
from an architectural redesign of the attention mechanism
itself.

=== PAGE 6 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 6
Algorithm 1 DARTS-GT: Two-Phase Architecture Search
Require: Graph dataset , candidate operations , L layers
Q( m ℓ) = ϕ(Z(ℓ))W Q (ℓ , ) m (14) Ensure: Optimized archi D tecture ∗ with trained O weights
A
K(ℓ) = o(ℓ)(Z(ℓ), E)W(ℓ) (15) 1: Phase 1: Architecture Search (first-order) with Mixed
m K,m
Operations
V m (ℓ) = o(ℓ)(Z(ℓ), E)W V (ℓ , ) m (16) 2: Randomly partition train into DARTStrain (60%) and
D D
(40%)
DARTSval
where ϕ is a learned transformation (implemented as a two- 3: D Initialize architecture parameters to zeroes, α = α o (ℓ)
layer MLP when additional expressiveness is beneficial, or { }
for all o , ℓ [L]
identity otherwise) and o(ℓ) is the operator (GNN variant) at ∈ O ∈
4: Initialize network weights w
layer ℓ and o(ℓ)(Z(ℓ), E) ∈ R n × d ; W Q (ℓ , ) m , W K (ℓ) ,m , W V (ℓ , ) m ∈ 5: for epoch = 1 to E search do
R d × dm. This design decouples the query space from the 6: Sample mini-batch from DARTStrain and DARTSval
structural encoding, allowing the attention mechanism to learn 7: Update w by w train (w, D α) ▷ First-or D der step (no
optimal feature-structure alignments through the query-key Hessian terms) ∇ L
interaction. 8: Update α by α val (w, α) ▷ First-order step ▷
∇ L
4) Continuous relaxation (DARTS).: During the search Single gradient step
phase, DARTS [27] relaxes the selection of discrete operators 9: end for
into a continuous mixture. At each layer ℓ, instead of selecting 10: Extract optimal operations:
a single operator, we compute a weighted combination: 11: for each layer ℓ [L] do
exp(α(ℓ)) 12: o(ℓ) ∗ ← arg m ∈ ax o ∈O α o (ℓ)
o(ℓ)(Z(ℓ), E) = o o(Z(ℓ), E) (17) 13: end for
o (cid:88)∈O o′∈O exp(α o (ℓ ′ )) · 1
1
4
5
:
:
A
Ph
∗
a
←
se
{
2
o
:
(
D
1)
i
∗
s
,
c
o
r
(
e
2
t
)
e
∗ ,
A
..
r
.,
c
o
h
(
i
L
te
) ∗
c
}
ture Training
(cid:80)
where: 16: Instantiate fresh model discrete with architecture ∗
M A
o(ℓ) denotes the mixed (continuous) operator at layer ℓ, 17: Train discrete on full train for E final epochs
M D
• distinguished from the final discrete selection, 18: return Trained model discrete
M
α o (ℓ) R is the learnable architecture parameter for
• ∈
operator o at layer ℓ,
o(Z(ℓ), E) is the output of applying operator o to the node 6) Edge Residual Stream: We inject a gated edge term into
• features Z(ℓ) and edge set E. the post-attention residual (before the first normalization). For
a) Use in attention during search.: During search, the edge features e (i,j) ∈ R de:
mixed operator output o(ℓ)(Z(ℓ), E) provides the structural e˜ = MLP e , (20)
(i,j) edge (i,j)
path for the keys and values:
he
j
dge = e˜ ((cid:0)i,j) , (cid:1) (21)
K(
m
ℓ) = o(ℓ)(Z(ℓ), E) W
K
(ℓ)
,m
, (18a) (i,(cid:88)j)
∈
E
V m (ℓ) = o(ℓ)(Z(ℓ), E) W V (ℓ , ) m . (18b) Hedge = he 1 dge · · · he n dge ⊤ ∈ R n × d, (22)
Y(ℓ) (cid:2) Y(ℓ) + σ g γ(ℓ) H (cid:3) edge (23)
←
We compute o(ℓ)(Z(ℓ), E) once per layer and share it across
a c l r l et h iz e a a t d io s n t , o o f ( o ℓ) rm is K re ( m p ℓ l ) ac a e n d d b V y m (ℓ t ) h , e m sel ∈ ec [ t 1 e , d . . o . p , e M rat ] o . r A o f ( t ℓ e ) r ∗ ( d s i e s e - σ le g a M ( r x n L ) ab P i l s e edg t s e h c e a : la s R r ig d c m e o o n → i t d ro R l f l u d in n g i c s ti t o h a n e , t(cid:0)w g a a o n t - e d l ; a(cid:1)y γ Y e ( r ℓ ( ) ℓ) M ∈ i L s R P th i w e s i p t a h re p - d r e r e r o s - p i l d a o y u u e a t r ; l
5) below). Attention may be dense or sparse, as that only
attention output. MLP is shared across layers and Hedge is
changes the softmax normalization (all-pairs vs. edge-softmax) edge
computed once per forward pass. Please see Supplementary
and does not alter the source of K , V .
m m
Table I for ablation studies related to the edge residual
5) Discretization and Final Architecture Training: Upon
stream. This edge residual stream operates independently of
search completion, we derive the discrete architecture by
the selected GNN operations, allowing the model to leverage
selecting the operator with maximum architecture weight at
edge information even when the discretized architecture uses
each layer:
operations with limited utilization of edge features.
7) Computational Cost: Our proposed asymmetric block
o(ℓ) ∗ = arg max α o (ℓ) (19) applies a single GNN per layer to produce the structural
o
∈O representations used in both K and V . In contrast, GMT’s
Following the standard DARTS protocol, the final dis- Graph Multi-head Attention (GMH) [26] instantiates per-head
cretized architecture = o(1) , ..., o(L) is then re- GNNs for both keys and values, i.e. GNNK, GNNV M .
A ∗ { ∗ ∗ } { i i }i=1
trained from scratch using the full training data. In our Consequently, the GNN forward cost in GMH scales as
implementation, we instantiate a fresh model containing only (2M cost ), while in our design it is (1 cost )
GNN GNN
O · O ·
the selected operations per layer. The algorithm is discussed per layer, where cost denotes the computational cost of a
GNN
in Algorithm 1. single GNN forward pass per layer. Thus, we preserve the fea-

=== PAGE 7 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 7
ture–structure interaction (Q from features; K, V from GNN) Definition 2 (Specialization). For graph G i ,
while reducing the structural computation across heads. From
the perspective of architecture search overhead, DARTS [27] Spec(G i ) = std δ m,ℓ,i m , ℓ , (25)
{ } ∈M ∈L
uses a first-order approximation that avoids Hessian–vector (cid:16) (cid:17)
where std(.) denotes the standard deviation across all heads’
product overhead.
deviations with = 1, ..., M , = 1, ..., L where M is
M { } L { }
C. Interpretability Framework the number of attention-heads and L total number of layers,
defined earlier.
1) Framework Overview: We propose a systematic frame-
work to quantify Graph Transformer interpretability through
High specialization indicates that heads are easily distin-
head-level and node-level analysis. Our approach goes beyond
guishable by their causal impact, whereas low specialization
visualization and yields quantitative, instance-specific evi-
suggests similar head impacts, making it harder to isolate
dence of which components causally drive the predictions. We
drivers unless complemented by the focus metric.
introduce Head-Deviation, Specialization, and Focus, aligned
with established interpretability principles where fidelity, spar- Definition 3 (Focus). Let Pi∗ =
{
p 1 , . . . , p k
}
be the top-
sity, and consensus are standard evaluation criteria [29], [30]. k head-layer pairs for instance G i , ranked according to
Because these metrics are ablation-based, they measure causal the head-ranking rule defined above, where p j = (i ′j , i ′j′ ),
contribution rather than correlation, allowing robust, fair com- j = 1, ..., k, i ′j
∈ M
, i ′j′
∈ L
and i ′j , i ′j′ are index variables.
parisons of interpretability across architectures. For a pair p, we define N p as the set of top-r% nodes by
a) Masking protocol (causal ablation).: For head m in incoming attention mass for that head on G i . N p contains the
layer ℓ, we implement a weight-level ablation that removes its top-r% nodes by the following values:
contribution at inference. Concretely, we silence head m in Dense attention: with head softmax matrix S(ℓ) , incoming
m
layer ℓ, by zeroing its pre-concatenation output Y m (ℓ) (equiv- • mass for node j is i [S( m ℓ)] ij ;
alently, zeroing the corresponding slice of W out in Eq. 6). Sparse attention: with edge-softmax s m,ij on (i, j) E,
• (cid:80) ∈
All other parameters, including the outputs of other heads, incoming mass for node j is s .
i:(i,j) E m,ij
layer norms, and feed-forward sublayers, are left unchanged. ∈
The Focus metric computes the average Jaccard similarity
The models are evaluated in eval mode (no dropout), with a (cid:80)
between all unique pairs:
fixed seed and without any retraining or adaptation.
ual
2)
att
H
en
e
t
a
i
d
on
D
h
e
e
v
a
ia
d
t
s
i
,
o
w
n:
e
T
m
o
ea
q
s
u
u
a
r
n
e
ti
h
fy
ow
th
t
e
h
i
e
m
ir
p
r
o
e
r
m
ta
o
n
v
c
a
e
l
o
a
f
ff
i
e
n
c
d
ts
iv
t
i
h
d
e
-
Focus(G i ) =
1
k
k − 1 k
|
N
N
pj
∩
N
N
pm|
, (26)
task loss. For a graph G with the true label y , let f (G ) 2 j=1 m=j+1 |
pj
∪
pm|
i i i (cid:88) (cid:88)
denote the prediction of the model and f − m,ℓ(G i ) denote the where k = k(k − 1) is t (cid:0) he (cid:1) number of unique head pairs.
prediction with head m in layer ℓ masked. 2 2
Unle(cid:0)ss(cid:1)stated otherwise, in our implementation, we use k=5
Definition 1 (Head Deviation). The head deviation measures
and a r = 10% node fraction. This metric quantifies the degree
the change in task loss when head m in layer ℓ is masked:
of consensus among the most causally important heads, i.e.
δ m,ℓ,i = loss f − m,ℓ(G i ), y i loss(f (G i ), y i ) , (24) measure top-k-head agreement on top-r% nodes. A high Focus
−
Here, loss( , )(cid:0) denotes the l(cid:1)oss appropriate to the ma- score indicates that the model’s key components agree on the
· ·
chine learning task (e.g., MAE for regression, binary cross- same salient graph substructures, simplifying interpretation.
entropy for binary classification, cross-entropy for multi-class 4) Dataset-Level Aggregation: For dataset with N
D
classification). We quantify head importance through causal graphs, we use the median for robustness to instance variability
intervention: the deviation δ measures how the prediction and outliers:
m,ℓ,i
changes when head m in layer ℓ is ablated, providing direct
Spec = medianN Spec(G ) , (27)
evidence of its functional necessity rather than mere correla- i=1{ i }
tional patterns. This approach asks ”what happens without this Focus = medianN i=1{ Focus(G i ) } . (28)
head?” , distinguishes truly important components from those
5) Interpretation Guidelines: The combination of special-
that merely appear salient in visualizations.
ization and focus determines how interpretable an instance-
a) Head ranking: For each instance, we rank the heads
level prediction is.
by their deviation δ in descending order. Beneficial heads
m,ℓ,i
(δ > 0, masking increases loss) thus appear first, while High Spec + High Focus: Most interpretable. Few heads
m,ℓ,i •
harmful heads (δ < 0) appear last. When we need a sign- dominate and agree on important nodes.
m,ℓ,i
agnostic view, we report the magnitude δ as a measure High Spec + Low Focus: Important heads are identifiable
| m,ℓ,i | •
of head impact. but attend to different nodes, suggesting complementary
3) Global Interpretability Metrics: Beyond individual head strategies.
importance, we summarize how interpretable the model is for Low Spec + High Focus: Uniform head importance but
•
a given instance across all heads. We define two complemen- consensus on nodes. Clear node-level attribution despite
tary metrics: specialization (importance concentration or head- unclear head roles.
distinguishability) and focus (consensus of important heads on Low Spec + Low Focus: Least interpretable. Uniform
•
nodes). importance with disparate attention patterns.

=== PAGE 8 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 8
Algorithm 2 Graph Transformer Interpretability Analysis 5) Quantitative interpretability analysis using our novel
Require: Model f , Test set , Top heads k framework to assess model transparency. Our evaluation
test
D
Ensure: Spec(G i ), Focus(G i ) for each G i of the interpretability framework operates on two levels.
{ }
1: Phase 1: Compute Head Deviations a) At the population level, we quantify overall model
2: for ℓ = 1 to L do interpretability through metrics (Specialization, Fo-
3: for m = 1 to M do cus) that characterize potentially how easily prac-
4: f − m,ℓ model with head m in layer ℓ masked titioners can identify important heads and nodes
←
5: for G i test do driving predictions.
∈ D
6: e base loss(f (G i ), y i ) b) At the instance level, we demonstrate how our
←
7: e masked loss f − m,ℓ(G i ), y i framework reveals specific graph components crit-
←
8: δ m,ℓ,i e masked e base ical for individual predictions.
← (cid:0) − (cid:1)
9: end for To ensure a robust evaluation, we perform experiments with
10: end for 4 random seeds for SOTA baseline comparisons (Tables III-
11: end for IV) and vanilla-GT versus DARTS-GT comparisons (Table II)
12: Phase 2: Compute Metrics following the benchmarking protocol introduced in [41], while
13: for G i test do using 3 seeds for architectural analysis experiments (Tables
∈ D
14: ∆ i δ m,ℓ,i : m = 1..M, ℓ = 1..L V-VII,VIII) due to computational constraints, which is also
← { }
15: Spec(G i ) std(∆ i ) widely followed protocol [6].
←
16: Pi∗
←
top-k pairs of head m in layer l: (m, ℓ) ranked
by δ m,ℓ,i (descending) A. Dataset and Task Selection
17: for p ∈ Pi∗ do We evaluated DARTS-GT against three categories of base-
18: N pi ← top-r% nodes by incoming attention mass lines: SOTA GNN architectures (e.g. GCN [17], GIN [31],
for p on G
i GatedGCN [32], PNA [42]), recent Graph Transformer models
19: end for (e.g. SAN [7], Graphormer [8], GPS [6]), and neural archi-
20: Focus(G i ) ← ( 1 k 2 ) k j= − 1 1 k m=j+1 | | N N p p j j ∩ ∪ N N p p m m | | tecture search methods for Graph Transformers (UGAS [16],
21: end for (cid:80) (cid:80) EGTAS [13], AutoGT [14]). Our evaluation spans eight di-
22: return (Spec(G i ), Focus(G i )) : G i test verse datasets that encompasses both graph-level and node-
{ ∈ D }
level prediction tasks, as detailed in Table I.
TABLE I: Dataset Statistics and Characteristics
Focus [0, 1] measures consensus on node attribution.
∈
Spec [0, ) measures concentration of head importance Dataset #Graphs Avg# Avg# Prediction Task
∈ ∞ Nodes Edges Level
or head-distinguishability. Together, they reveal which heads
ZINC 12,000 23.2 24.9 Graph Regression
matter (specialization) and what they attend to (focus), pro-
OGBG-MolHIV 41,127 25.5 27.5 Graph Binary Cls.
viding faithful, comparable, instance-level interpretability and OGBG-MolPCBA 437,929 26.0 28.1 Graph Multi-task Cls.
MalNet-Tiny 5,000 1,410.3 2,859.9 Graph Multi-class Cls.
a principled route to model-level comparison. The complete
PATTERN 14,000 118.9 3,039.3 Node Binary Cls.
process is depicted in Algorithm 2. CLUSTER 12,000 117.2 2,150.9 Node Multi-class Cls.
Peptides-Struct 15,535 150.9 307.3 Graph Multi-task Reg.
Peptides-Func 15,535 150.9 307.3 Graph Multi-task Cls.
The selected benchmarks [6] provide comprehensive cover-
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
age in multiple dimensions. This range accommodates diverse
tasks such as graph regression (single and multi-task), graph
In this section, we comprehensively evaluate DARTS-GT
classification (binary, multi-class, and multi-task), and node-
in multiple aspects to establish both its performance advan-
level predictions (binary and multi-class classifications). The
tages and its interpretability characteristics. Our experimental
datasets exhibit substantial variation in scale, from small
analysis comprises five key components:
molecular graphs in ZINC (averaging 23 nodes) to large-
1) Direct comparison with standard (vanilla) Graph Trans- scale graphs in MalNet-Tiny (averaging 1,410 nodes), testing
former [19] to isolate the impact of our architectural the ability of our architecture to handle varying structural
innovations; complexities. Dataset sizes range from 5,000 to more than
2) Comparison against state-of-the-art baselines including 437,000 graphs, ensuring robust evaluation across different
hand-designed GNNs, recent Graph Transformers, and dataset sizes. This diversity, spanning molecular property
neural architecture search methods; prediction (OGBG), biological sequences (Peptides), and syn-
3) Analysis of heterogeneous versus uniform architectures thetic benchmarks (PATTERN, CLUSTER), demonstrates that
and random-search obtained architectures, to validate the our architectural choices generalize beyond domain-specific
benefits of layer-wise GNN diversity through DARTS patterns. Notably, the inclusion of two Long-Range Graph
search; Benchmark (LRGB) datasets, Peptides-Struct and Peptides-
4) Ablation studies examining the role of asymmetric de- Func, facilitated evaluation of the capacity of our model
sign while understanding edge features role is given in to capture long-range dependencies, a critical challenge for
the supplementary; Graph Transformers.

=== PAGE 9 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 9
TABLE III: Test Performance on Standard Benchmarks.
B. Comparison Against Standard Graph Transformers
Shown is the mean ± std across 4 seeds. Best performance
Table II presents the performance comparison of DARTS-
is bolded while second best is underlined. Datasets where we
GT with the standard Graph Transformer (Vanilla-GT) intro-
have outperformed GPS (but not best) is marked with asterisks
duced by Dwivedi et al. [19], which forms the foundation
of many subsequent works [16]. Unlike recent approaches Model ZINC MALNET PATTERN CLUSTER
that enhance graph transformers through parallel MPNN paths MAE ↓ Acc ↑ Acc ↑ Acc ↑
[6], novel positional encoding [7], or structural encoding-
GCN [17] 0.367±0.011 NA 71.892±0.334 68.498±0.976
augmented attention [8], DARTS-GT alters the core attention GIN [31] 0.526±0.051 NA 85.387±0.136 64.716±1.553
mechanism through asymmetric query-key value computation GAT [18] 0.384±0.007 NA 78.271±0.186 70.587±0.447
and heterogeneous per-layer GNN selection. This is a signif- GatedGCN [12] 0.282±0.015 0.9223±0.65 85.568±0.088 73.840±0.326
icant departure from standard GT where Q, K, V share the GatedGCN-LSPE [43] 0.090±0.001 NA NA NA
same computational source without GNNs. This experiment PNA [42] 0.188±0.004 NA NA NA
quantifies the improvement of DARTS-GT over the baseline DGN [44] 0.168±0.003 NA 86.680±0.034 NA
GSN [45] 0.101±0.010 NA NA NA
it extends. For rigorous comparison, we standardized most
CIN [46] 0.079±0.006 NA NA NA
experimental conditions using the GPS configuration [6]. We
CRaWl [47] 0.085±0.004 NA NA NA
extend our implementation from their opensource repository,
GIN-AK+ [48] 0.080±0.001 NA 86.850±0.057 NA
adopting their fixed positional encoding, hidden dimensions,
attention heads, dropout rates, and pre/post-processing com- EGTAS [13] 0.075±0.073 NA 86.742±0.053 79.236±0.215
UGAS [16] NA NA 86.89±0.02 78.14±0.21
ponents for both models. Only the layer count was ad-
justed to maintain a comparable parameter budget range. This SAN [7] 0.139±0.006 NA 86.581±0.037 76.691±0.65
controlled setup (Supplementary-Tables II,III,IV), prioritizing Graphormer [8] 0.122±0.006 NA NA NA
methodological clarity over peak performance, ensures that K-Subgraph SAT [2] 0.094±0.008 NA 86.848±0.037 77.856±0.104
EGT [23] 0.108±0.009 NA 86.821±0.020 79.232±0.348
observed improvements stem from design changes rather than
GPS [6] 0.070±0.004 0.9264±0.78 86.685±0.059 78.016±0.180
hyperparameter tuning or auxiliary components.
DARTS-GT 0.066±0.003 0.9325±0.006 86.68±0.036 78.299±0.07*
TABLE II: Performance Comparison: Vanilla-GT vs DARTS-
GT across diverse datasets with Dense and Sparse
Attention Mechanisms. ∆ represents the relative im- gains stem primarily from the MPNN path itself, or from the
synergistic interaction where MPNN features and transformer
provement of DARTS-GT over Vanilla-GT, calculated as
| DARTS-GT − Vanilla-GT | 100%, where improvement direction ac- attention are jointly fed into subsequent layers? The DARTS-
count|s Va f n o il r la m -G e T t|ric typ × e (decrease for MAE, increase for others). GT design removes this ambiguity by demonstrating compet-
itive performance using only enhanced attention mechanisms
Shown is the mean ± std across 4 seeds. Best performances
without any parallel MPNN component. This isolation proves
are highlighted in bold.
that the Graph Transformer itself can be made structurally
Attn. Model Pep-Struct Pep-Func PATTERN MolHIV MolPCBA aware through architectural innovation in the attention mech-
MAE AP Acc AUROC AP anism, rather than relying on auxiliary components or cross-
↓ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
pathway synergies.
Vanilla-GT 0.254±.002 0.623±.009 0.678±.164 0.761±.009 0.048±.007
Dense DARTS-GT 0.247±.001 0.669±.004 0.852±.001 0.766±.016 0.201±.008
C. Comparison Against SOTA leaderboard
∆(%) 2.8% 7.4% 25.7% 0.7% 318%
Table III and Table IV benchmark DARTS-GT against
Vanilla-GT 0.268±.001 0.557±.005 0.681±.199 0.758±.009 0.241±.032
three categories of methods: hand-designed GNNs (e.g., GCN,
Sparse DARTS-GT 0.263±.001 0.609±.014 0.867±.000 0.776±.006 0.258±.004
GIN, GatedGCN, PNA), Graph Transformers (e.g., SAN,
∆(%) 1.9% 9.3% 27.3% 2.4% 7.1%
Graphormer, GPS), and NAS-based GT approaches (EGTAS,
We tested both dense (full attention) and sparse attention AutoGT, UGAS). Each method is reported under its validation-
mechanisms to understand how architectural improvements selected configuration (dense or sparse). Full settings are
translate across different computational settings. The results available in supplementary. DARTS-GT achieves state-of-
reveal consistent gains across all benchmarks, with particularly the-art results on four datasets: ZINC (0.066), MalNet-Tiny
striking improvements on PATTERN (25-27% relative accu- (93.25%), and both LRGB benchmarks: Peptides-Func (0.669)
racy increase) and OGBG-MolPCBA (318% relative improve- and Peptides-Struc (0.246). Most notably, for the other four
ment in average precision for dense attention). Even on long- datasets, PATTERN, CLUSTER, MolHIV, MolPCBA, there
range benchmarks (Peptides), where standard transformers are distinct best performing methods, namely EGTAS (for
already perform reasonably, DARTS-GT achieves meaningful CLUSTER), UGAS (for PATTERN), CIN (for MolHIV) and
non-trivial improvements over the baseline. Our comparison CRAW1 (for MolPCBA). Therefore, DARTS-GT substantially
reveals that standard Graph Transformers, when isolated from stands out as outperforming all methods in four datasets,
auxiliary components, exhibit significant limitations, partic- while none of the other four highlighted methods or any other
ularly evident in MolPCBA dense attention. This raises a methods outperformed all methods for more than one dataset.
critical question about hybrid architectures like GPS (which For LRGB [49] benchmarks, DARTS-GT advances beyond
uses dense attention with parallel MPNN): do performance both GPS and the recent UGAS method, with considerably

=== PAGE 10 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 10
TABLE IV: Test Performance on OGB and LRGB Bench-
marks. Shown is the mean ± std across 4 seeds. Best perfor-
mance is bolded while second best is underlined.
Model MolHIV MOLPCBA PEP-FUNC PEP-STRUC
AUROC AP AP MAE
↑ ↑ ↑ ↓
GCN NA NA 0.5930 ± 0.002 0.3496 ± 0.0013
GINE [39] NA NA 0.5498 ± 0.0079 0.3547 ± 0.0045
GCN+virtualnode [6] 0.7599±0.0119 0.2424±0.0034 NA NA
GIN+virtualnode [6] 0.7707±0.0149 0.2703±0.0023 NA NA
GatedGCN NA NA 0.5864 ± 0.0077 0.3420 ± 0.0013
GatedGCN-LSPE NA 0.267±0.002 NA NA
PNA 0.7905±0.0132 0.2838±0.0035 NA NA
DeeperGCN [6] 0.7858±0.0117 0.2781±0.0038 NA NA
DGN 0.7970±0.0097 0.2885±0.0030 NA NA
GSN(directional) 0.8039±0.0090 NA NA NA
CIN 0.8094±0.0057 NA NA NA
CRaWl NA 0.2986±0.0025 NA NA Fig. 2: Heatmap showing the proportion of each GNN type
GIN-AK+ 0.7961±0.0119 0.2930±0.0044 NA NA selected by DARTS-GT across different datasets. The values
ExpC [50] 0.7799±0.0082 0.2342±0.0029 NA NA indicate fraction of total layers using each GNN operation,
AUTOGT 0.7495±0.0102 NA NA NA that is averaged over 4 seeds. Color intensity reflects the usage
EGTAS 0.7981±0.0117 NA NA NA frequency as indicated
UGAS 0.7997±0.51 NA 0.667±0.007 0.247±0.002
SAN 0.7785±0.2470 0.2765±0.0042 NA NA TABLE V: Comparison of DARTS-GT against uniform (ho-
SAN+LAPPE [6] NA NA 0.6384±0.0121 0.2683±0.0043 mogeneous) and random-searched architectures across differ-
GraphTrans [12] NA 0.2761±0.0029 NA NA ent attention types and dataset variety. Shown is the mean ±
GPS [6] 0.7880±0.0101 0.2907±0.0028 0.6535±0.0041 0.2500±0.0005 std across 3 seeds. Best results are in bold.
DARTS-GT 0.7766±0.006 0.2584±0.004 0.669±0.004 0.246±0.0006
Dataset Attn-Type Model Type Perf
Random 0.7388±0.0741
lower variance on Peptides-Struc than the latter (±0.0006
Uniform-GINE 0.7688±0.0018
vs UGAS’s ±0.002), indicating more stable solutions. The
consistent gains across diverse tasks validate that differen- CLUSTER Sparse Uniform-GATEDGCN 0.7047±0.069
tiable architecture search discovers effective designs within the Uniform-GATV2 0.7805±0.00213
transformer framework. In addition to the SOTA performance DARTS-GT (ours) 0.7835±0.0004
achieved by the DARTS-GT discovered architectures, they ex-
Random 0.646±0.0048
hibit enhanced interpretability characteristics, as demonstrated
Uniform-GINE 0.6555±0.0093
in sections IV-F and IV-G.
Peptides-Func Dense Uniform-GATEDGCN 0.6718±0.0035
Uniform-GATV2 0.6530±0.0081
D. Dissecting DARTS-GT’s Architecture Discovery Patterns
DARTS-GT (ours) 0.6730±0.0056
Figure 2 visualizes the GNN distributions discovered by
Random 0.919±0.0081
DARTS across eight datasets, revealing prominent diversity
Uniform-GINE 0.919±0.0081
in architectural choices. The selection patterns range from
Malnet-Tiny Sparse Uniform-GATEDGCN 0.929±0.0060
highly specialized (MolPCBA with 81% GINE dominance)
Uniform-GATV2 0.922±0.0098
to nearly uniform distributions (ZINC, MolHIV with balanced
GNN usage). This demonstrates that DARTS adapts to dataset- DARTS-GT (ours) 0.934±0.0057
specific requirements rather than converging to a univer-
sal solution, as expected from a neural architecture search
(NAS) algorithm. Interestingly, node-level tasks (PATTERN, performance (examples of a few searched architectures are
CLUSTER) favored GatedGCN. We could also observe the given in Supplementary Figure 2).
complete absence of GATV2 in Peptides datasets, coupled with Although Figure 2 reveals that GatedGCN dominates in
GatedGCN’s dominance (87.5% in Peptides-Func). However, CLUSTER (67.2%), this prevalence does not indicate supe-
these proportions only show that the GNN selection is utilised, riority as a standalone operation. Table V exposes a counter-
but the layer-wise positioning of each GNN, which DARTS intuitive phenomenon: The most-used GNN in a heterogeneous
optimizes through gradient-based search, is equally critical. architecture may not be the best performing uniform architec-
A dataset might use 50% GINE, but whether these appear in ture.
early or late layers inherently impacts feature extraction and Table V compares DARTS-GT against uniform architec-

=== PAGE 11 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 11
TABLE VI: Ablation Study: Symmetric (Q ,K and V ) vs
tures and random heterogeneous selection (mean of 3 dif- m m m
Asymmetric Attention Design (DARTS-GT design ).Shown is
ferent random configurations). Despite dominant operations
in DARTS-GT architectures (e.g., GatedGCN at 67.2% in
the mean ± std across 3 seeds. Best performance is bolded.
CLUSTER, 87.5% in Peptides-Func), uniform deployment
Dataset Attn-Type Model Type Performance
of these same operations underperforms: uniform GatedGCN
achieves 0.7047 vs DARTS-GT’s 0.7835 on CLUSTER and Symmetric 78.2±0.0010
CLUSTER Sparse
0.6718 vs 0.6730 on Peptides-Func. On MalNet-Tiny, uniform DARTS-GT (Asymmetric) 78.35±0.0004
GatedGCN outperforms uniform GINE despite GINE dom-
Symmetric 0.667±0.009
inating (62.5%) the DARTS architecture. This demonstrates Peptides-Func Dense
that no single operation is universally optimal, and ”popu- DARTS-GT (Asymmetric) 0.6730±0.0056
lar” operations in DARTS-GT architecture can underperform Symmetric 0.923±0.008
MalNet-Tiny Sparse
when deployed homogeneously. Although DARTS-GT’s gains
DARTS-GT (Asymmetric) 0.9334±0.0057
appear modest, they align with typical graph benchmark
improvements where SOTA advances are often under 1% (as
seen in SAN, GPS, UGAS and our Tables III-IV). These pretable decisions. Having established DARTS-GT’s com-
gains are consistent across datasets/seeds, not isolated cases. petitive performance, in this section, we examine whether
Moreover, finding even the best uniform architecture requires these heterogeneous architectures offer advantages in model
testing n separate models, while the heterogeneous space transparency using the framework introduced in Section III-C.
grows exponentially (34 = 81 for 4 layers; 310 = 59, 049 for 1) Quantitative Interpretability Metrics: Table VII presents
10 layers). DARTS-GT efficiently navigates this space without the interpretability metrics derived from our causal ablation
exhaustive enumeration. framework (Section III-C). Through systematic head masking
Three key insights emerge: (1) DARTS discovers synergistic on each test instance, we compute head deviations that quan-
layer-wise combinations rather than repeating the strongest tify causal importance, then aggregate using median values
operation; (2) DARTS-GT consistently outperforms random for robustness to outliers. The median Specialization captures
heterogeneous architectures, confirming principled optimiza- the typical concentration of head importance across instances,
tion beats chance; (3) DARTS-GT’s value lies in removing while median Focus measures consensus among important
the rigid commitment to uniformity or heterogeneity in ad- heads on critical nodes. Supplementary Figures 4 and 5 show
vance. It adaptively recovers strong uniform solutions when population-level distributions as scatter plots, with median
sufficient and heterogeneous mixtures when advantageous. Our values indicated, for all tests under consideration. We eval-
contribution extends beyond numerical improvements. While uated on two diverse benchmarks: MolHIV (OGB, molecular
prior GTs relied on auxiliary GNN paths or hand-designed graphs, classification) and Pep-Struc (LRGB, peptide graphs,
uniform backbones, we show that the core transformer archi- regression), representing different domains, graph sizes, and
tecture itself can be systematically optimized. This reframes task types. For transparency, we report GPS [6] with both
GT design as an open direction for principled exploration, sparse attention (matching our implementation) and dense
where the demonstrated consistent improvements evidence yet attention (authors’ original) on MolHIV, revealing how atten-
unexplored directions in Graph Transformers. tion mechanism choices significantly impact interpretability (
Focus: 0.5734 sparse vs 0.111 dense).
E. Ablation Studies: Assymetric vs Symmetric attention Higher Focus facilitates identifying critical nodes as im-
Although Table II demonstrated DARTS-GT’s superiority portant heads converge on common graph regions, while
over Vanilla-GT (standard GT), a critical question remains: Is higher Specialization enables distinguishing which heads drive
asymmetric attention design essential, or would a symmetric predictions. The combination of these metrics determines the
variant where Q ,K and V all derive from GNN outputs practical effort required to understand model decisions.
m m m
perform better? DARTS-GT demonstrates consistent interpretability across
To address this, we conducted controlled experiments across both datasets, achieving best Specialization on MolHIV
3 seeds comparing our asymmetric design against its symmet- (0.00124) and best Focus on Pep-Struc (0.129), while securing
ric counterpart. All other experimental conditions remained second-best performance on the complementary metrics. This
identical between models. consistency across diverse domains suggests that DARTS-
The results obtained consistently favored the DARTS-GT GT’s produces reliably interpretable models. In contrast, GPS
asymmetric design over the symmetric variant in all configura- and Vanilla-GT show more variable patterns: GPS (sparse)
tions tested. This validates our architectural choice: decoupling achieves the best Focus but minimal Specialization on Mol-
queries from structural encoding (Q from features, K /V HIV, making head importance indistinguishable, while Vanilla-
m m m
from GNNs) provides superior performance compared to the GT shows the best Specialization but lowest Focus on Pep-
seemingly natural approach of deriving all attention compo- Struc, requiring reconciliation of divergent attention patterns.
nents from the same GNN source. These metrics characterize the complexity of the interpreta-
tion rather than establishing absolute superiority. Our evalua-
F. Interpretability Analysis tion on two datasets provides initial empirical evidence on real-
Although performance gains demonstrate DARTS-GT’s ef- world applications but, like any empirical study, cannot guar-
fectiveness, modern applications increasingly demand inter- antee trends generalize across all benchmarks. However, one

=== PAGE 12 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 12
TABLE VII: Quantitative interpretability metrics across archi-
Figure 3 presents a representative instance from the
tectures. Median Specialization: concentration of importance
Peptides-Struc datasets, where deviation profiles identify
in fewer heads; Median Focus: consensus on important nodes.
truly important heads regardless of visual prominence,
Best values in bold while second-best are underlined. and attention heatmaps of these top-k heads reveal criti-
cal graph regions. Each attention head is uniquely iden-
Dataset Model Specialization Focus tified by its layer and head index, following the for-
mat L<layer_index>_H<head_index>. For example,
Vanilla-GT (sparse) 0.000634 0.533
L0 H0 refers to the first head in the first layer. While we
MolHIV GPS (sparse) 0.000044 0.5734
demonstrate Peptides-struct example here, MolHIV is moved
GPS (dense) 0.000091 0.111
to supplementary (Supplementary Figure 3) for space con-
DARTS-GT (sparse) 0.00124 0.555
straints.
Vanilla-GT (dense) 0.055 0.067 Graph 1 (Figure 3, Peptides-Struct, 209 nodes) demonstrates
the attention visualization paradox where visual prominence
Pep-Struc GPS (dense) 0.038 0.085
does not always correlate with importance. (a) DARTS-GT:
DARTS-GT (dense) 0.044 0.129
Top heads L1 H1 (δ = 0.228), L0 H3 (δ = 0.146), L0 H0
(δ = 0.139) all exhibit low standard deviation of their atten-
tion distributions (stdev) (0.0076, 0.0029, 0.0038) producing
of our primary contributions, the interpretability framework
uniformly colorful attention patterns, while targeting different
itself, enables practitioners to quantify the difficulty of in-
nodes as L1 H1 focuses most on nodes 27-28, L0 H3 on node
terpretation. Instance-level analysis (Supplementary Figures 4
47,197 and L0 H0 on nodes 32,141. Moderate specialization
and 5) reveals considerable variation across graphs, reminding
(Spec= 0.085) with low Focus (0.059) indicates distinguish-
us that specific instances may present unique interpretability
able heads attending to disparate regions. (b) GPS: Demon-
challenges regardless of model-level trends.
strates the paradox clearly—the most important head L0 H0
In our next section, we demonstrate how our framework
(δ = 0.317, stdev = 0.0063) appears dark/sparse concentrating
enables granular, instance-specific interpretation grounded in
most on node 191 (attention score 17.93) followed by 202
causal head ablation, moving beyond aggregate statistics to
(attention score 2.20), while visually prominent colorful head
understand individual prediction drivers.
with overall uniform attention, such as L0 H2 (δ = 0.113,
stdev = 0.0026) have minimal impact with a much weaker
attention on node 197 (attention score 2.657). Very low Focus
G. Instance-Specific Interpretation Analysis
(0.036) further confirms disparate mechanisms. (c) Vanilla-
Having established the interpretability characteristics at GT: Inverts the GPS pattern—highest impact head L0 H0
the dataset level, we now demonstrate how our framework (δ = 0.262, stdev = 0.0043) shows uniform/colorful attention
provides actionable, instance-specific insights to understand across nodes 54,203,26,113 and more (attn score around
individual predictions. Unlike aggregate metrics that charac- 4.0) while L2 H1 (δ = 0.188, stdev = 0.0179) displays a
terize general model behavior, instance-level analysis reveals concentrated dark pattern on node 46 (attn score 13.07) despite
which specific graph components causally drive predictions lower importance. Highest specialization (Spec= 0.127) with
for particular test cases through systematic head ablation. low Focus (0.064) suggests strongly differentiated but unco-
This approach is analogous to how GNNExplainer [21] iden- ordinated heads for this particular instance under this method.
tifies critical subgraphs for GNNs but is adapted for Graph To our knowledge, the above is the first instance-specific
Transformer attention mechanisms. It grounds interpretation quantitative method for Graph Transformers to identify which
in causal evidence rather than correlational attention patterns, heads and nodes causally drive predictions. We have quantita-
revealing not just where models attend but which attention tively shown further (Supplementary Figure 1, Supplementary
heads causally influence outcomes. Section I), that entropy heuristics cannot replace our head-
Our framework automatically generates per-instance JSON deviation based causal ablation method. Although space con-
outputs containing head deviations, top-k important heads (we straints limit us to two representative examples (additional
keep k = 4 for MolHIV and k = 3 for Peptides-struct for instances available in our GitHub repository), these were
our experiments), their attended nodes, attention distribution strategically selected: Graph 1 (Peptides-struct) showcases a
statistics, and interpretability metrics (Specialization, Focus). deliberate paradox where visual prominence do not always
The higher absolute deviation ( δ ) indicates greater head correlate with causal importance while Graph 50 (MolHIV)
| |
significance, i.e. removing such heads causes larger prediction presented in supplementary section III, demonstrates our
errors, providing causal evidence of their contribution. framework’s standard operation and how these metrics varies
Additionally, we computed the standard deviation of each based on attention types.
head’s attention distribution to characterize its focus pattern. Across instances, we did not observe a reliable correlation
Although not a central metric, this simple statistic provides between attention salience and causal head importance. In
useful context: a low standard deviation indicates that a head GPS, the most critical head (L0 H0, δ = 0.317) appears
distributes attention uniformly across nodes (broad emphasis), sparse/dark while colorful heads contribute minimally. In con-
while a high standard deviation suggests concentrated attention trast, in Vanilla-GT, a visually prominent dark pattern (L2 H1)
on specific nodes (selective emphasis). proves causally less important than a uniform/colorful head

=== PAGE 13 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 13
(a) DARTS-GT
(b) GPS
(c) Vanilla-GT
Fig. 3: Instance analysis of Graph 1 (Peptides-Struc, 209 nodes) demonstrating deviation profiles and top-3 attention heatmaps.In
the attention heatmaps, columns represent target nodes that receive attention.

=== PAGE 14 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 14
(L0 H0, δ = 0.262). This instance-specific variability, where drive predictions, while visually prominent patterns prove
concentrated attention may be causally critical, irrelevant, dispensable. This invalidates current visualization-based inter-
or anywhere between, demonstrates that practitioners cannot pretation practices [23], [24] and establishes causal deviation
determine head importance from visualization alone. The analysis as essential to understand Graph Transformer deci-
quantitative deviation analysis of our framework resolves this sions.
ambiguity by directly measuring the casual contribution of Future Directions: The convergence of improved perfor-
each head through ablation, regardless of visual appearance. mance and quantifiable interpretability opens exciting pos-
This enables reliable identification of functionally significant sibilities for scientific discovery. An appropriate real-world
components that attention visualization would miss or misrep- impactful domain application to test our DARTS-GT with
resent. Users can generate similar analyses for any instance the interpretability framework would be the protein structure-
using our code provided, extending beyond these illustrative to-function prediction problem, where given a protein with
examples to their specific use cases. known functions [F 1, F 2, F 3, F 4], DARTS-GT could not only
predict these functions accurately, but also identify which
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS structural motifs causally contribute to each function. When
This work introduced DARTS-GT, a differentiable architec- the model makes a confident prediction on a novel protein,
ture search framework for Graph Transformers that discovers our interpretability framework can distinguish whether the
optimal depth-wise GNN configurations while providing quan- prediction relies on established structural patterns (suggesting
tifiable interpretability. We now revisit the research questions genuine functional similarity) or spurious correlations (indi-
posed at the outset. cating potential overfitting).
Addressing Q1 - Architectural Performance and Adapt- In conclusion, DARTS-GT demonstrates that Graph Trans-
ability: Our experiments demonstrate that Graph Transformers formers do not need to choose between performance and in-
can achieve superior performance through dynamic, layer- terpretability. By redesigning the attention mechanism through
wise GNN selection. DARTS-GT consistently outperformed differentiable architecture search and grounding interpretation
vanilla Graph Transformers on all benchmarks, with relative in causal analysis, we provide a path toward models that are
improvements ranging from 0.7% to 318% depending on both more capable and more trustworthy: essential qualities for
the complexity of the dataset. Against state-of-the-art meth- deployment in high-stakes scientific and medical applications.
ods, DARTS-GT achieved the best new results on 4 of 8
datasets (ZINC, MalNet-Tiny, Peptides-Func, and Peptides-
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Struc), while remaining competitive on others.
This research was funded by Google DeepMind, with S.C.
The architectures discovered reveal DARTS’ adaptive na-
being supported by Google DeepMind Scholarship for her
ture: selection patterns range from highly specialized (81%
DPhil studies. The authors also thank Dr.Petar Velicˇkovic´
GINE on MolPCBA) to nearly uniform distributions (balanced
for helpful discussions. For the purpose of Open Access, the
usage on ZINC). This dataset-specific optimization validates
authors have applied a CC BY public copyright license to any
that no universal architecture exists; rather, optimal configu-
Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM) version arising from this
rations emerge from the interplay between task requirements
submission. The authors acknowledge the use of the University
and graph properties. Our ablation studies further confirmed
of Oxford Advanced Research Computing (ARC) facility in
that the asymmetric attention design (Q from features, K/V
carrying out this work. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22558.
from GNNs) consistently outperforms symmetric variants,
demonstrating that decoupling structural encoding from fea-
ture queries improves graph understanding. This suggests that REFERENCES
without auxillary MPNNs and by redesigning the attention
[1] K. Lin, L. Wang, and Z. Liu, “Mesh Graphormer,” Aug. 2021,
mechanism itself, comparable SOTA performance can be
arXiv:2104.00272 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.
achieved. 00272
Addressing Q2 - Quantifiable Interpretability: Our inter- [2] D. Chen, L. O’Bray, and K. Borgwardt, “Structure-Aware Transformer
for Graph Representation Learning,” Jun. 2022, arXiv:2202.03036
pretability framework provides the first quantitative method to
[stat]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.03036
understand Graph Transformer decisions at both the population [3] Z. Gu, X. Luo, J. Chen, M. Deng, and L. Lai, “Hierarchical graph
and the instance levels. The median-based aggregation of transformer with contrastive learning for protein function prediction,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 39, no. 7, p. btad410, Jul. 2023. [Online].
Specialization and Focus metrics offers robust dataset-level
Available: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/doi/10.1093/
characterization. Practitioners can quickly assess whether the bioinformatics/btad410/7208864
prediction of a model will be easily interpretable (high Special- [4] M. Gao, D. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wang,
S. Li, Y. Guo, G. I. Webb, A. T. N. Nguyen, L. May, and
ization, high Focus) or require extensive analysis (low values
J. Song, “GraphormerDTI: A graph transformer-based approach
on both). These population-level metrics serve as practical for drug-target interaction prediction,” Computers in Biology and
guidelines for model selection in deployment scenarios where Medicine, vol. 173, p. 108339, May 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482524004232
interpretability matters.
[5] C. Yuan, K. Zhao, E. E. Kuruoglu, L. Wang, T. Xu, W. Huang,
At the instance level, our framework reveals a critical find- D. Zhao, H. Cheng, and Y. Rong, “A Survey of Graph Transformers:
ing: visual attention salience does not reliably indicate func- Architectures, Theories and Applications,” Feb. 2025, arXiv:2502.16533
[cs] version: 2. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.16533
tional importance. Through systematic ablation, we demon-
[6] L. Rampa´, M. Galkin, V. P. Dwivedi, A. T. Luu, G. Wolf, and D. Beaini,
strated cases where sparse, nearly invisible attention patterns “Recipe for a General, Powerful, Scalable Graph Transformer.”

=== PAGE 15 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 15
[7] D. Kreuzer, D. Beaini, W. L. Hamilton, V. Le´tourneau, and P. Tossou, [27] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, and Y. Yang, “DARTS: Differentiable
“Rethinking Graph Transformers with Spectral Attention,” Oct. 2021, Architecture Search,” Apr. 2019, arXiv:1806.09055 [cs]. [Online].
arXiv:2106.03893 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.09055
03893 [28] Y. Qin, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, and W. Zhu, “Graph Differentiable
[8] C. Ying, T. Cai, S. Luo, S. Zheng, G. Ke, D. He, Y. Shen, Architecture Search with Structure Learning,” Nov. 2021. [Online].
and T.-Y. Liu, “Do Transformers Really Perform Bad for Graph Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=kSv AMdehh3
Representation?” Nov. 2021, arXiv:2106.05234 [cs]. [Online]. Available: [29] K. Lukyanov, G. Sazonov, S. Boyarsky, and I. Makarov, “Robustness
http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.05234 questions the interpretability of graph neural networks: what to
[9] Y. Gao, H. Yang, P. Zhang, C. Zhou, and Y. Hu, “GraphNAS: Graph do?” May 2025, arXiv:2505.02566 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http:
Neural Architecture Search with Reinforcement Learning,” Aug. 2019, //arxiv.org/abs/2505.02566
arXiv:1904.09981 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1904. [30] K. Amara, R. Ying, Z. Zhang, Z. Han, Y. Shan, U. Brandes,
09981 S. Schemm, and C. Zhang, “GraphFramEx: Towards Systematic
[10] H. Zhao, Q. Yao, and W. Tu, “Search to aggregate neighborhood for Evaluation of Explainability Methods for Graph Neural Networks,”
graph neural network,” Apr. 2021, arXiv:2104.06608 [cs]. [Online]. May 2024, arXiv:2206.09677 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.06608 abs/2206.09677
[11] L. Wei, H. Zhao, Z. He, and Q. Yao, “Neural Architecture Search for [31] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How Powerful are
GNN-Based Graph Classification,” ACM Transactions on Information Graph Neural Networks?” Feb. 2019, arXiv:1810.00826 [cs]. [Online].
Systems, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 1–29, Jan. 2024. [Online]. Available: Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.00826
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3584945 [32] X. Bresson and T. Laurent, “Residual Gated Graph ConvNets,” Apr.
[12] Z. Wu, P. Jain, M. A. Wright, A. Mirhoseini, J. E. Gonzalez, 2018, arXiv:1711.07553 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
and I. Stoica, “Representing Long-Range Context for Graph Neural 1711.07553
Networks with Global Attention,” Jan. 2022, arXiv:2201.08821 [cs]. [33] P. Michel, O. Levy, and G. Neubig, “Are Sixteen Heads Really Better
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.08821 than One?” Nov. 2019, arXiv:1905.10650 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
[13] C. Wang, J. Zhao, L. Li, L. Jiao, F. Liu, and S. Yang, “Automatic http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10650
Graph Topology-Aware Transformer,” Aug. 2024, arXiv:2405.19779 [34] N. Pochinkov, B. Pasero, and S. Shibayama, “Investigating Neuron
[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19779 Ablation in Attention Heads: The Case for Peak Activation Centering.”
[14] Z. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Guan, Z. Zhang, H. Li, and W. Zhu, “AU- [35] N. Bahador, “Mechanistic Interpretability of Fine-Tuned Vision Trans-
TOGT: AUTOMATED GRAPH TRANSFORMER ARCHI- TECTURE formers on Distorted Images: Decoding Attention Head Behavior for
SEARCH,” 2023. Transparent and Trustworthy AI.”
[15] J. Lin, X. Guo, S. Zhang, D. Zhou, Y. Zhu, and J. Shun, “UnifiedGT: [36] S. Heimersheim and N. Nanda, “How to use and interpret activation
Towards a Universal Framework of Transformers in Large-Scale Graph patching,” Apr. 2024, arXiv:2404.15255 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
Learning,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Big Data http://arxiv.org/abs/2404.15255
(BigData). Washington, DC, USA: IEEE, Dec. 2024, pp. 1057–1066. [37] F. Zhang and N. Nanda, “Towards Best Practices of Activation
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10825327/ Patching in Language Models: Metrics and Methods,” Jan. 2024,
[16] W. Song, X. Wu, B. Yang, Y. Zhou, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Ge, arXiv:2309.16042 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.
H. P. Lee, and C. Wu, “Towards Efficient Few-shot Graph Neural 16042
Architecture Search via Partitioning Gradient Contribution,” Jun. 2025, [38] G. Anandalingam and T. L. Friesz, “Hierarchical optimization: An
arXiv:2506.01231 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2506. introduction,” Annals of Operations Research, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1–11,
01231 Dec. 1992. [Online]. Available: http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
[17] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph url?scp=0002633543&partnerID=8YFLogxK
Convolutional Networks,” Feb. 2017, arXiv:1609.02907 [cs]. [Online]. [39] H. Wang, H. Yin, M. Zhang, and P. Li, “EQUIVARIANT AND STA-
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907 BLE POSITIONAL ENCODING FOR MORE POWERFUL GRAPH
[18] P. Velicˇkovic´, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio`, and NEURAL NETWORKS,” 2022.
Y. Bengio, “Graph Attention Networks,” Feb. 2018, arXiv:1710.10903 [40] S. Brody, U. Alon, and E. Yahav, “How Attentive are Graph Attention
[stat]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10903 Networks?” Jan. 2022, arXiv:2105.14491 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
[19] V. P. Dwivedi and X. Bresson, “A Generalization of Transformer http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.14491
Networks to Graphs,” Jan. 2021, arXiv:2012.09699 [cs]. [Online]. [41] V. P. Dwivedi, C. K. Joshi, A. T. Luu, T. Laurent, Y. Bengio, and
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.09699 X. Bresson, “Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks,” Dec. 2022,
[20] K. Choromanski, V. Likhosherstov, D. Dohan, X. Song, A. Gane, arXiv:2003.00982 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.
T. Sarlos, P. Hawkins, J. Davis, A. Mohiuddin, L. Kaiser, D. Belanger, 00982
L. Colwell, and A. Weller, “Rethinking Attention with Performers,” [42] G. Corso, L. Cavalleri, D. Beaini, P. Lio`, and P. Velicˇkovic´,
Nov. 2022, arXiv:2009.14794 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/ “Principal Neighbourhood Aggregation for Graph Nets,” Dec. 2020,
abs/2009.14794 arXiv:2004.05718 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.
[21] R. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Zitnik, and J. Leskovec, 05718
“GNNExplainer: Generating Explanations for Graph Neural Networks,” [43] V. P. Dwivedi, A. T. Luu, T. Laurent, Y. Bengio, and X. Bresson,
Nov. 2019, arXiv:1903.03894 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/ “Graph Neural Networks with Learnable Structural and Positional
abs/1903.03894 Representations,” Feb. 2022, arXiv:2110.07875 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
[22] A. Shehzad, F. Xia, S. Abid, C. Peng, S. Yu, D. Zhang, and K. Verspoor, http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07875
“Graph Transformers: A Survey,” Jul. 2024, arXiv:2407.09777 [cs]. [44] D. Beaini, S. Passaro, V. Le´tourneau, W. L. Hamilton, G. Corso, and
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09777 P. Lio`, “Directional Graph Networks,” Apr. 2021, arXiv:2010.02863
[23] M. S. Hussain, M. J. Zaki, and D. Subramanian, “Global Self-Attention [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02863
as a Replacement for Graph Convolution,” in Proceedings of the 28th [45] G. Bouritsas, F. Frasca, S. Zafeiriou, and M. M. Bronstein, “Improving
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Graph Neural Network Expressivity via Subgraph Isomorphism
Aug. 2022, pp. 655–665, arXiv:2108.03348 [cs]. [Online]. Available: Counting,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.03348 Intelligence, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 657–668, Jan. 2023, arXiv:2006.09252
[24] B. El, D. Choudhury, P. Lio`, and C. K. Joshi, “Towards Mechanistic [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09252
Interpretability of Graph Transformers via Attention Graphs,” Feb. [46] C. Bodnar, F. Frasca, N. Otter, Y. G. Wang, P. Lio`, G. Montu´far,
2025, arXiv:2502.12352 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/ and M. Bronstein, “Weisfeiler and Lehman Go Cellular: CW
2502.12352 Networks,” Jan. 2022, arXiv:2106.12575 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
[25] L. Li, J. Liu, X. Ji, M. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “Self-Explainable Graph http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.12575
Transformer for Link Sign Prediction,” Dec. 2024, arXiv:2408.08754 [47] J. To¨nshoff, M. Ritzert, H. Wolf, and M. Grohe, “Walking Out of
[cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2408.08754 the Weisfeiler Leman Hierarchy: Graph Learning Beyond Message
[26] J. Baek, M. Kang, and S. J. Hwang, “Accurate Learning of Passing,” Aug. 2023, arXiv:2102.08786 [cs]. [Online]. Available:
Graph Representations with Graph Multiset Pooling,” Jun. 2021, http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.08786
arXiv:2102.11533 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2102. [48] L. Zhao, W. Jin, L. Akoglu, and N. Shah, “From Stars to Subgraphs:
11533 Uplifting Any GNN with Local Structure Awareness,” Apr. 2022,

=== PAGE 16 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 16
arXiv:2110.03753 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.
03753
[49] V. P. Dwivedi, L. Rampa´sˇek, M. Galkin, A. Parviz, G. Wolf, A. T.
Luu, and D. Beaini, “Long Range Graph Benchmark,” Nov. 2023,
arXiv:2206.08164 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.
08164
[50] M. Yang, R. Wang, Y. Shen, H. Qi, and B. Yin, “Breaking the
Expression Bottleneck of Graph Neural Networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5652–5664,
Jun. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
9759979/

=== PAGE 17 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 1
Supplementary Materials - DARTS-GT:
Differentiable Architecture Search for Graph
Transformers with Quantifiable Instance-Specific
Interpretability Analysis
Shruti Sarika Chakraborty Peter Minary
I. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ATTENTION CONCENTRATION The weak median correlation (0.167) combined with high
AND FUNCTIONAL IMPORTANCE variance (0.437) demonstrates that attention concentration
We investigate if heads with concentrated attention patterns (entropy) is not a reliable predictor of functional importance.
exhibit higher functional importance. We test this system- The relationship varies fundamentally across instances i.e.
atically by correlating attention entropy with head devia- concentrated attention may indicate critical heads, dispensable
tion across all test instances for one representative dataset : heads, or have no relationship to importance at all. This proves
that attention-based visualization or entropy heuristics cannot
Peptides-Struc for one method - DARTS-GT.
a) Methodology.: For each graph G with n nodes, head substitute for causal ablation methods. Our head deviation
i
m in layer ℓ, we compute attention entropy from the attention framework remains necessary for faithful interpretation, as it
matrix A( m ℓ) R n × n. First, we sum incoming attention for directly measures functional contribution rather than relying
∈ on correlational attention patterns that may be misleading.
each target node:
n
S(ℓ)[j] = A(ℓ)[k, j] (1) II. ABLATION STUDIES: DATASET-DEPENDENT ROLE OF
m m
k=1
EDGE INFORMATION
X
Then normalize to obtain a probability distribution: Here we examine the impact of edge residual connections
S(ℓ)[j] across different attention mechanisms and datasets. While our
P (ℓ)[j] = m (2) GNN experts (GINE, GatedGCN, GATV2) inherently utilize
m n j′=1 S m (ℓ)[j ′ ] edge features, these ablation studies demonstrate whether
Finally, compute Shannon enPtropy: adding explicit edge residual connections to the attention
mechanism provides additional benefits. Supplementary Ta-
n
H(m, ℓ, i) = P (ℓ)[j] log P (ℓ)[j] (3) ble I presents results across four datasets comparing dense and
− m m sparse attention with and without edge residual connections.
j=1
X
For computational efficiency, ZINC experiments use 1000
where low entropy indicates concentrated attention on few
epochs, sufficient to demonstrate relative performance trends.
nodes and high entropy indicates diffuse attention. For each
The results reveal dataset-specific utility of edge residuals.
instance i, we compute the Spearman rank correlation between
These findings demonstrate that edge residual connections
H(m, ℓ, i) and δ across all heads
{ } m ∈M ,ℓ ∈L { m,ℓ,i } m ∈M ,ℓ ∈L are not universally beneficial, validating our design choice of
and layers.
making them optional.
b) Results on Peptides-Struct: We apply this analysis
to DARTS-GT on the Peptides-Struct dataset. Supplementary
Figure 1 shows the distribution of per-instance correlations.
III. INSTANCE-SPECIFIC INTERPRETABILITY ANALYSIS
The left histogram reveals correlations spanning from -1.0 to FOR MOLHIV :
+1.0, with a median of only 0.167 and standard deviation Here we demonstrate instance-specific interpretability anal-
of 0.437. Notably, the standard deviation exceeds twice the ysis for MolHIV’s graph number: 50. For Graph-50 (17 nodes)
median value. The right boxplot confirms this inconsistency: of MolHIV, head deviation profiles and attention patterns
the interquartile range crosses zero, and whiskers extend (Supplementary Figure 3) reveal distinct interpretability char-
across nearly the full correlation range. Substantial portions acteristics. In the attention heatmaps, columns represent target
of instances exhibit negative correlations (where concentrated nodes that receive attention. (a) DARTS-GT: Clear head spe-
attention corresponds to low importance), near-zero correla- cialization (Spec= 0.00288) with top heads forming two con-
tions (no relationship), and positive correlations (concentrated sensus pairs - L0 H3 (δ = 0.016 - highest) /L1 H1 attending
attention corresponds to high importance). to target node 1, L2 H0/L1 H0 attending to target node 9. The
Focus for this instance is 0.333. (b) GPS with dense attention:
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford Minimal head specialization (Spec= 1.01 10 9) with nearly
OX1 3QG, UK. Emails: shruti.chakraborty@cs.ox.ac.uk, × −
peter.minary@cs.ox.ac.uk. imperceptible deviations (highest δ = 4.87 10 − 9 at L5 H1),
×

=== PAGE 18 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 2
Supplementary Figure 1: Distribution of per-instance Spearman correlations between attention entropy and head deviation on
Peptides-Struct.
Supplementary Table I: Effect of edge features on Graph
biases, with the search adapting operator selection based on
Transformer performance across multiple datasets and atten-
both network depth and dataset characteristics.
tion types. Shown is the mean ± std across 3 seeds. Best results
are in bold.
Dataset Attn Type Mode Perf
No edge 0.1054±0.0055
Dense
Edge 0.098±0.0082
ZINC*
No edge 0.0812±0.0043
Sparse
Edge 0.0782±0.006
No edge 0.2011±0.0101
Dense
Edge 0.2224±0.004
MOLPCBA
No edge 0.258±0.0043
Sparse
Edge 0.2545±0.003
No edge 0.2693±0.0013
Dense
Edge 0.3107±0.0122
CLUSTER
No edge 0.7773±0.0020
Sparse
Edge 0.7835±0.0004
No edge 0.2466±0.0003
Dense
Edge 0.248±0.0025
Peptides-Struc
No edge 0.263±0.0004
Sparse
Edge 0.263±0.0008
suggests uniform head importance. Partial consensus with
L5 H1/L0 H1 attending to target node 10 while others target
nodes 7,11. The overall Focus attained is 0.167. (c) GPS with
sparse attention: Low head specialization (Spec= 7.39 10 5)
−
×
with low deviations (highest δ = 0.0003 at L4 H3) . High
consensus with L4 H3/L6 H0/L5 H3 attending to target node
9 while L6 H2 target node 14. The overall Focus attained
Supplementary Figure 2: Discovered layer-wise operators
is very high 0.5. (d) Vanilla-GT: Low specialization (Spec=
after DARTS. For each layer, the search selects exactly one
2.47 10 5). Similar partial consensus with L14 H1/L3 H2
× − operator from GINE, GATv2, GatedGCN . CLUSTER (left,
attending to target node 14, others targeting nodes 8,5 and { }
L0–L15): the architecture is dominated by GatedGCN across
overall Focus is same as GPS (dense attention) with 0.167.
depth, with brief GINE selections around L5–L6 and GATv2
Despite similar Focus values in GPS (dense attn) and Vanilla-
at L0-L1. ZINC (right, L0–L7): shallow layers favor GINE
GT, their vastly different Specialization values indicate distinct
(L0–L1, L7), the mid-depth region prefers GATv2 (L3–L5),
interpretation challenges.
and GatedGCN appears at L2 and L6. These dataset-specific,
depth-varying patterns indicate that the search adapts inductive
IV. LAYER-WISE ARCHITECTURE DISCOVERY VIA DARTS biases per layer, rather than converging to a uniform choice.
After search, the selected per-layer GNN is used once to
The DARTS search process automatically discovers optimal
produce K, V and is shared across heads.
GNN operators for each layer, as illustrated in Supplementary
Figure 2 for CLUSTER and ZINC datasets. These results
demonstrate that different layers require different inductive

=== PAGE 19 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 3
(a) DARTS-GT
(b) GPS
(c) Vanilla-GT
Supplementary Figure 3: Instance analysis of Graph 50 (MolHIV, 17 nodes). Deviation profiles and top-4 attention heatmaps
for each model, with columns representing target nodes. GPS with dense attention is given here.

=== PAGE 20 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 4
(d) GPS (sparse)
Supplementary Figure 3: (continued) Instance analysis of Graph 50 - GPS with sparse attention.
V. POPULATION LEVEL INTERPRETABILITY ANALYSIS
Supplementary figures 4 and 5 visualize population-level
interpretability distributions across two test sets : Peptide-
Struc and MolHIV respectively, revealing distinct patterns
between architectures and datasets. The plots demonstrate
that interpretability is inherently dataset-dependent and varies
significantly at the instance level. While we report median
values for dataset-level comparison, each point represents
an individual graph with its own Specialization and Focus
values derived from our causal ablation framework. This
instance-level variation, visible as the scatter around median
values, underscores that some graphs remain challenging to
interpret regardless of model choice, while others yield clear
interpretability patterns.
Supplementary Figure 4: Instance-level interpretability distri-
butions on Peptides-Struc test set. (a) Vanilla-GT model (dense
attention). Each point represents a single test graph positioned
by its Specialization (head importance concentration) and
Focus (consensus among important heads).

=== PAGE 21 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 5
(a) GPS (Pep-Struc, dense) (b) DARTS-GT (Pep-Struc, dense)
Supplementary Figure 4: (continued) (b) GPS model shows different clustering patterns compared to Vanilla-GT. (c) DARTS-
GT achieves the highest median Focus (0.129), indicating stronger node consensus. All models use dense attention. Note
the different scale compared to MolHIV (Supplementary Figure 5), with Specialization value, suggesting dataset-specific
interpretability characteristics.
Supplementary Table II: Hyperparameters across all datasets Supplementary Table III: Hyperparameters across all datasets
(Part 1) (Part 2)
Hyperparameters ZINC MolHIV MOLPCBA MALNET Hyperparameters PATTERN CLUSTER PEP-FUNC PEP-STRUC
Architecture Parameters Architecture Parameters
Number of Layers 8 8 4 4 Number of Layers 6 16 2 2
Hidden dim 64 64 384 64 Hidden dim 64 48 120 120
Attention type Sparse Sparse Sparse Sparse Attention type Sparse Sparse Dense Dense
Heads 4 4 4 4 Heads 4 8 4 4
Dropout 0 0.05 0.2 0 Dropout 0 0 0 0
Attention dropout 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Attention dropout 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
Edge residual weight 0.1 NA NA 0.1 Edge residual weight 0.1 0.1 NA NA
Q-projection Identity Identity Identity Identity Q-projection Identity Identity MLP MLP
DARTS Parameters DARTS Parameters
DARTS epochs 120 30 30 30 DARTS epochs 20 25 50 50
DARTS splits ratio 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 DARTS splits ratio 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6
Architecture LR 4.00E-04 4.00E-04 4.00E-04 4.00E-04 Architecture LR 4.00E-04 4.00E-04 4.00E-04 4.00E-04
Grad clip 5 5 5 5 Grad clip 5 5 5 5
Training Parameters Training Parameters
LR reduce factor 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 LR reduce factor 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
LR schedule patience 10 10 10 10 LR schedule patience 10 10 10 10
Min learning rate 1.00E-06 1.00E-06 1.00E-06 1.00E-06 Min learning rate 1.00E-06 1.00E-06 1.00E-06 1.00E-06
Initial learning rate 0.0025 0.0025 0.0025 0.0025 Initial learning rate 0.0025 0.0025 0.0025 0.0025
Weight decay 3.00E-04 3.00E-04 3.00E-04 3.00E-04 Weight decay 3.00E-04 3.00E-04 3.00E-04 3.00E-04
Epochs 2000 100 100 100 Epochs 100 100 200 200
Warmup epochs 50 5 5 10 Warmup epochs 5 5 0 0
Graph-specific Parameters Graph-specific Parameters
Graph pooling sum mean mean max Graph pooling NA NA mean mean
Positional Encoding RWSE-20 RWSE-16 RWSE-16 None Positional Encoding LapPE-16 LapPE-10 LapPE-10 LapPE-10
PE dim 28 16 20 NA PE dim 16 16 16 16
PE encoder linear linear linear NA PE encoder DeepSet DeepSet DeepSet DeepSet
Computational Resources Computational Resources
DARTS-Parameters 641989 583017 10186472 327893 DARTS-Parameters 487369 728678 604817 604696
Discrete-Parameters 412397 344929 5707484 208329 Discrete-Parameters 338775 511250 426341 448240
Total DARTS time 4490.0s 2777.0s 4441.0s 630.0s Total DARTS time 1320.45s 3454.26s 409.0s 411.54s
Discrete phase time 26.0s/15.0h 63.0s/2.37h 158.0s/5.0h 16.0s/0.645h Discrete phase time 58.0s/1.87h 97.4s/3.88h 12.49s/0.775h 12.5s/0.845h

=== PAGE 22 ===
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL., NO., OCTOBER 2025 6
(a) Vanilla-GT (MolHIV, sparse) (b) GPS (MolHIV, sparse)
(c) GPS (MolHIV, dense) (d) DARTS-GT (MolHIV, sparse)
Supplementary Figure 5: Instance-level interpretability distributions on MolHIV test set. Each point represents a single test
graph positioned by its Specialization (head importance concentration) and Focus (consensus among important heads). GPS
shown with both sparse and dense attention to demonstrate architectural impact on interpretability.
Supplementary Table IV: Comprehensive parameter comparison across all models and datasets. Best (lowest) parameter count
is highlighted in bold
Model Attention ZINC MolHIV MOLPCBA MALNET PATTERN CLUSTER PEP-STRUC PEP-FUNC
Dense Attention
Vanilla-GT Dense 3,56,261 4,51,793 84,06,236 5,03,749 3,02,385 3,85,126 4,29,611 4,29,490
GPS Dense 4,23,717 5,58,625 97,44,496 5,27,237 3,37,201 5,02,054 5,04,459 5,04,362
DARTS-GT Dense 4,41,751 3,98,289 85,57,152 NA 3,61,591 5,07,206 4,26,341 4,48,240
Sparse Attention
Vanilla-GT Sparse 3,56,261 4,51,793 84,06,236 NA 3,02,385 3,38,086 4,12,397 4,29,490
DARTS-GT Sparse 4,28,333 3,44,929 57,07,484 2,08,329 3,38,775 5,11,250 3,97,301 4,08,160
